U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4884

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=62
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Statistical Tables
*******************

Crime Against Persons with Disabilities, 2009–2012 - 
Statistical Tables

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

Persons age 12 or older who had disabilities experienced 1.3 
million nonfatal violent crimes in 2012 (table 1). Nonfatal 
violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault. The annual number of 
nonfatal violent victimizations against persons with 
disabilities increased from 2008 to 2012. However, no 
statistically significant change was found in the number of 
violent victimizations from 2011 to 2012. 

The findings in this report are based on the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey 
(NCVS), a household survey that collects data on U.S. 
residents age 12 or older (excluding those living in 
institutions). The NCVS adopted survey questions from the 
U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) to 
identify respondents with disabilities. The NCVS defines 
disability as the product of interactions among individuals’ 
bodies; their physical, emotional, and mental health; and the 
physical and social environment in which they live, work, or 
play. Disability exists where this interaction results in 
limitations of activities and restrictions to full 
participation at school, at work, at home, or in the 
community. Disabilities are classified according to six 
limitations: hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-
care, and independent living. 

Data from the ACS and the 2000 U.S. Standard Population from 
the Decennial Census were used to estimate age-adjusted 
victimization rates for persons with and without 
disabilities. For this report, victimization rates were 
generated by using the ACS population estimates for persons 
with disabilities. The Methodology further details data 
sources, computation procedures, and data limitations.
Statistical tables in this report detail the level and rates 
of nonfatal violent victimization against persons with and 
without disabilities, describe the types of disabilities, and 
compare victim characteristics. With the exception of table 
1, all estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages 
centered on the most recent year. For example, estimates 
reported for 2012 represent the average estimates for 2011 
and 2012. This method improves the reliability and stability 
of estimate comparisons over time.

*****************
List of tables
*****************

Table 1. Annual number of violent crimes, by type of crime 
and victim’s disability status, 2008–2012

Table 2. Unadjusted violent victimization rates, by victim’s 
disability status and age, 2009–2012

Table 3. Age-adjusted and unadjusted rates of violent 
victimization for persons with disabilities, by type of 
crime, 2009–2012

Table 4. Age-adjusted and unadjusted rates of violent 
victimization for persons without disabilities, by type of 
crime, 2009–2012

Table 5. Age-adjusted rates of violent victimization, by 
victim’s disability status, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, 
2009–2012

Table 6. Percent of violence against persons with 
disabilities that involved victims with multiple disability 
types, by type of crime, 2009–2012

Table 7. Age-adjusted rates of violent victimization, by type 
of crime and number of disability types, 2009–2012

Table 8. Unadjusted rate of violent victimization against 
persons with disabilities, by disability type, 2009–2012

Table 9. Unadjusted rate of serious violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities, by disability type, 2009–
2012

Table 10. Unadjusted rate of simple assault against persons 
with disabilities, by disability type, 2009–2012

Table 11. Unadjusted violent victimization rate, by victim’s 
sex and disability type, 2009–2012

*************************
List of appendix tables
*************************

Appendix Table 1. Standard errors for table 1: Annual number 
of violent crimes, by type of crime and victim’s disability 
status, 2008–2012

Appendix Table 2. Standard errors for table 2: Unadjusted 
violent victimization rates, by victim’s disability status 
and age, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 3. Standard errors for table 3: Age-adjusted 
and unadjusted rates of violent victimization for persons 
with disabilities, by type of crime, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 4. Standard errors for table 4: Age-adjusted 
and unadjusted rates of violent victimization for persons 
without disabilities, by type of crime, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 5. Standard errors for table 5: Age-adjusted 
rates of violent victimization, by victim’s disability 
status, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 6. Standard errors for table 6: Percent of 
violence against persons with disabilities that involved 
victims with multiple disability types, by type of crime, 
2009–2012

Appendix Table 7. Standard errors for table 7: Age-adjusted 
rates of violent victimization, by type of crime and number 
of disability types, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 8. Standard errors for table 8: Unadjusted 
rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities, by disability type, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 9. Standard errors for table 9: Unadjusted 
rate of serious violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities, by disability type, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 10. Standard errors for table 10: Unadjusted 
rate of simple assault against persons with disabilities, by 
disability type, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 11. Standard errors for table 11: Unadjusted 
violent victimization rate, by victim’s sex and disability 
type, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 12. Annual number and percent of U.S. 
population with disabilities, by demographic characteristics, 
2008–2012

Appendix Table 13. Annual number and percent of U.S. 
population without disabilities, by demographic 
characteristics, 2008–2012

Appendix Table 14. U.S. population according to the Census 
Bureau’s ACS and PUMS data, by victim’s disability status and 
demographic characteristics, 2010

Appendix Table 15. U.S. population calculated and according 
to the Census Bureau’s PUMS data, by victim’s disability 
status and demographic characteristics, 2011

Appendix Table 16. Unadjusted rate of violent victimization, 
by victim’s disability status, sex, race, and Hispanic 
origin, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 17. Standard errors for appendix table 16: 
Unadjusted rate of violent victimization, by victim’s 
disability status, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 18. Unadjusted rate of violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities, by type of crime and 
number of disability types, 2009–2012

Appendix Table 19. Standard errors for appendix table 18: 
Unadjusted rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities, by type of crime and number of disability 
types, 2009–2012

*******************************
Violent crime by victim’s age 
and disability status
*******************************

* Among persons ages 12 to 15, the unadjusted rate of violent 
victimization was nearly three times higher for persons with 
disabilities (123 per 1,000) than for persons without 
disabilities (43 per 1,000) in 2012 (table 2).

* In 2012, among persons ages 16 to 19, persons with 
disabilities had an unadjusted rate of violent victimization 
(102 per 1,000) that was about 2.5 times higher than that of 
persons without disabilities (41 per 1,000).

* The rate of violent victimization among persons with 
disabilities ages 12 to 15 increased from 77 per 1,000 in 
2011 to 123 per 1,000 in 2012.

* No statistically significant difference was found in the 
unadjusted rate of violent victimization among persons with 
disabilities ages 16 to 19 from 2011 (123 per 1,000) to 2012 
(102 per 1,000).

* The unadjusted rate of violent victimization among persons 
with disabilities ages 25 to 34 increased from 54 per 1,000 
in 2011 to 83 per 1,000 in 2012.

* The unadjusted rate of violent victimization against 
persons with disabilities age 50 to 64 slightly increased 
from 2011 (20 per 1,000) to 2012 (28 per 1,000).***Footnote 
1Differences described as slight or slightly passed a test at 
the 0.10 level of statistical significance (90% confidence 
level). Caution is required when comparing estimates not 
explicitly discussed in this report.

******************************************************

********************************
The use of age-adjusted rates
********************************

Direct comparisons of the violent victimization rate between 
persons with and without disabilities without taking into 
account the differences in age distributions between the two 
populations can be misleading. The age distribution of 
persons with disabilities differs considerably from that of 
persons without disabilities, and violent crime victimization 
rates vary significantly with age. To compare rates of 
violent victimization by disability status, an age adjustment 
method was used to handle the differences in age istributions 
of persons with disabilities and without disabilities. 
According to the ACS, persons with disabilities are generally 
older than persons without disabilities. For example, about 
42% of persons with disabilities were age 65 or older in 
2012, compared to 12% of persons without disabilities. The 
age adjustment standardizes the rate of violence for persons 
with and without disabilities to show what the rates would be 
if they had the same age distribution as the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population as calculated by the U.S. Census Bureau.
******************************************************

********************************
Violent crime by type of crime
********************************

* In 2012, the age-adjusted rate of violent victimization for 
persons with disabilities (60 per 1,000 persons with 
disabilities) was nearly three times the rate among persons 
without disabilities (22 per 1,000 persons without 
disabilities) (table 3 and table 4).

* In 2012, the age-adjusted rate of serious violent 
victimization for persons with disabilities (22 per 1,000) 
was more than three times higher than that for persons 
without disabilities (6 per 1,000).

* During 2012, serious violence (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, and aggravated assault) accounted for about 38% of 
nonfatal violent crime against persons with disabilities, 
which was higher than the percentage found for persons 
without disabilities (29%) (not shown).

* In 2012, the age-adjusted rate of simple assault against 
persons with disabilities (38 per 1,000) was more than twice 
that for persons without disabilities (16 per 1,000).

* No statistically significant difference was found in the 
rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities from 2009 to 2012. Similarly, the rate of 
violent victimization remained stable against persons without 
disabilities from 2009 (22 per 1,000) to 2012 (22 per 1,000).

* From 2011 to 2012, the age-adjusted rates of simple assault 
against persons with and without disabilities increased.

* Among persons with and without disabilities, no 
statistically significant differences were detected in 
robbery from 2009 to 2012.

* Among persons with disabilities, the rate of rape and 
aggravated assault increased from 2009 to 2012.

* Violent crime rates by sex, race, and Hispanic origin

********
Sex
********

* In 2012, the age-adjusted rate of violent victimization was 
higher for persons with disabilities than for those without 
disabilities for both males and females (table 5).

* The rate of violence against males with disabilities was 59 
per 1,000 in 2012, compared to 25 per 1,000 for males without 
disabilities.

* For females with disabilities, the rate of violence was 62 
per 1,000 in 2012, compared to 20 per 1,000 females without 
disabilities.

* In 2012, no statistically significant difference was found 
in the rate of violent victimization against males with 
disabilities (59 per 1,000) and females with disabilities (62 
per 1,000).

* The age-adjusted rate of violence against males with 
disabilities increased from 39 to 59 per 1,000 from 2009 to 
2012. However, no statistically significant difference was 
found for females over the same period.

***************************
Race and Hispanic origin
***************************

* For each racial group measured, persons with disabilities 
had higher age-adjusted violent victimization rates than 
persons without disabilities in 2012.

* For each of the racial groups examined, no statistically 
significant difference was found among persons with 
disabilities in the age-adjusted rate of violent 
victimization for 2009 and 2012.

* In 2012, whites with disabilities (67 per 1,000) had a 
higher age-adjusted rate of violent victimization than blacks 
with disabilities (46 per 1,000).

* Among persons with disabilities, other races (American 
Indian or Alaska Native; and Asian, Native Hawaiian, or other 
Pacific Islander) had a lower rate of violence (33 per 1,000) 
than whites (67 per 1,000) and persons of two or more races 
(76 per 1,000) in 2012.

* Among persons with and without disabilities, Hispanics had 
a lower rate of violent victimization than non-Hispanics in 
2012. 

* Among both Hispanics and non-Hispanics, persons with 
disabilities had a higher rate of violent victimization than 
persons without disabilities in 2012.

********************************************
Violent crime by number of disability types
********************************************

* In 2012, 52% of nonfatal violent crime against persons with 
disabilities involved victims who had multiple disability 
types. While this was not statistically different from the 
percentage found in 2011 (57%), it was an increase from 2009 
(41%) (table 6).

* From 2009 to 2012, the percentage of violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities in which the victim had 
multiple disability types increased for rape or sexual 
assault and robbery.

* In 2012, persons with one disability type (53 per 1,000) 
were less likely than persons with multiple disability types 
to be violently victimized (table 7).

* In 2012, no statistically significant difference was found 
between the age-adjusted rate of serious violent 
victimization against persons with one disability type (19 
per 1,000) and persons with multiple disability types (25 per 
1,000).

* The age-adjusted rate of violent crime against persons with 
one disability type increased from 37 per 1,000 in 2011 to 53 
per 1,000 in 2012. Among persons with multiple disability 
types, no statistically significant difference was found in 
the 2011 and 2012 age-adjusted rate of violent victimization.

********************
Types of disability
*********************

* Persons with cognitive disabilities had the highest 
unadjusted rate of violent victimization from 2009 to 2012 
(table 8).

* No statistically significant difference was found in the 
2009 and 2012 rates of violent victimization against persons 
with hearing or vision disabilities.

* In 2012, persons with ambulatory disabilities (30 per 
1,000) had a higher rate of violent victimization than 
persons with hearing disabilities (20 per 1,000).

* No statistically significant difference was found in the 
2012 rates of violent victimization against persons with 
hearing (20 per 1,000) and vision (25 per 1,000) 
disabilities.

* Among persons with cognitive disabilities, the rate of 
serious violent crime doubled across the study period from 12 
per 1,000 in 2009 to 24 per 1,000 in 2012 (table 9).

* The rate of serious violent victimization against persons 
with self-care disabilities nearly tripled from 2009 (4 per 
1,000) to 2012 (11 per 1,000).

* The unadjusted rate of simple assault against persons with 
cognitive disabilities increased from 27 per 1,000 in 2011 to 
40 per 1,000 in 2012 (table 10).

* In 2012, among persons with hearing, vision, cognitive, or 
independent living disabilities, no differences were detected 
in the unadjusted rates of violent victimization by victim’s 
sex (table 11).

* Males with ambulatory or self-care disabilities had higher 
rates of violent victimization than females with the same 
disability types in 2012.

*******************************
Among males with disabilities—
*******************************

* With the exception of those with ambulatory or cognitive 
disabilities, no changes were detected in the unadjusted rate 
of violent victimization with any disability type from 2011 
to 2012.

* From 2011 to 2012, the unadjusted rate of violent 
victimization against males with ambulatory disabilities 
increased from 25 per 1,000 to 39 per 1000.

* The unadjusted rate of violent victimization against males 
with cognitive disabilities increased from 49 per 1,000 in 
2011 to 66 per 1,000 in 2012.

*********************************
Among females with disabilities—
*********************************

* For each disability type measured, no statistically 
significant difference was found between the 2011 and 2012 
rates of violent victimization against females.

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
**************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an ongoing 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and 
other theft) both reported and not reported to police. In 
addition to providing annual level and change estimates on 
criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of 
information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents. 

Survey respondents provide information about themselves 
(e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, 
education level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. Information is collected for each 
victimization incident about the offender (e.g., age, race 
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and experiences 
with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months 
either in-person or over the phone, for a total of seven 
interviews. 

Generally, all first interviews are conducted in-person. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in the sample for 
the 3-year period. The sample includes persons living in 
group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings, and excludes persons living in 
military barracks and institutional settings, such as 
correctional or hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For 
more information, see the Survey Methodology for Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS 
web, May 2011.)

In 2007, the NCVS adopted questions from the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the rate 
of victimization against people with disabilities. The NCVS 
does not identify persons in the general population with 
disabilities. The ACS Subcommittee on Disability Questions 
developed the disability questions based on questions used in 
the 2000 Decennial Census and earlier versions of the ACS. 
The questions identify persons who may require assistance to 
maintain their independence, be at risk for discrimination, 
or lack opportunities available to the general population 
because of limitations related to a prolonged (6 months or 
longer) sensory, physical, mental, or emotional condition. 
More information about the ACS and the disability questions 
is available on the U.S. Census Bureau website at 
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/.

*****************************************
Changes to the disability questions 
in the NCVS and ACS in 2008 
*****************************************

In 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau changed some of the 
disability questions on the ACS. The question about sensory 
disability was separated into two questions about blindness 
and deafness, and the questions about physical disability 
were asked only about serious difficulty walking or climbing 
stairs. Also, questions on employment disability and going 
outside of the home were eliminated in 2008. Census Bureau 
analysis of 2007 and 2008 ACS disability data revealed 
significant conceptual and measurement differences between 
the 2007 and 2008 disability questions. The Census Bureau 
concluded that data users should not compare the 2007 
estimates of the population with disabilities and those of 
later years. Because the 2007 and 2008 NCVS disability 
questions mirrored the ACS, estimates of victimization of 
people with disabilities from the 2007 and 2008 NCVS should 
not be compared. As a result, the 2007 disability data are 
not presented in this report. Further explanation about 
incomparability of the 2007 and 2008 ACS disability data is 
available at 
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/methodology/content_t
est/P4_Disability.pdf.

*****************************************
Definitions of disability types 
*****************************************

Disabilities are classified according to six limitations: 
hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care, and 
independent living.

* Hearing limitation entails deafness or serious difficulty 
hearing.

* Vision limitation is blindness or serious difficulty 
seeing, even when wearing glasses. 

* Cognitive limitation includes serious difficulty in 
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions because of a 
physical, mental, or emotional condition.

* Ambulatory limitation is difficulty walking or climbing 
stairs.

* Self-care limitation is a condition that causes difficulty 
dressing or bathing.

* Independent living limitation is a physical, mental, or 
emotional condition that impedes doing errands alone, such as 
visiting a doctor or shopping.

*****************************************
Disability questions included in the 
NCVS from 2008 through 2012
*****************************************
 
Questions 169a through 173

169a. Are you deaf or do you have serious difficulty hearing? 

169b. Are you blind or do you have serious difficulty seeing 
even when wearing glasses? 

170a. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, 
do you have serious difficulty: 

* concentrating, remembering, or making decisions? 

* walking or climbing stairs? 

* dressing or bathing? 

170b. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, 
do you have difficulty doing errands alone such as visiting a 
doctor’s office or shopping?
 
171. Is “Yes” marked in any of 169a–170b? (That is, has the 
respondent indicated that he/she has a health condition or 
disability?)

172. During the incident you just told me about, do you have 
reason to suspect you were victimized because of your health 
condition(s), impairment(s), or disability(ies)? 

173. What health conditions, impairments, or disabilities do 
you believe caused you to be targeted for this incident?

In the ACS, persons ages 12 to 14 are not asked about having 
an independent living disability and are therefore not 
included in the populations with independent living 
disabilities. Even though crime victims ages 12 to 14 receive 
this question in the NCVS (question 170b), victims ages 12 to 
14 who respond affirmatively are excluded from rates of 
violent victimization against persons with an independent 
living disability in order to match the age limitations for 
having an independent living disability in the ACS (age 15 or 
older). In this report, rates of violence against persons 
with an independent living disability are per 1,000 persons 
age 15 or older, compared to rates per 1,000 persons ages 12 
or older for other disability types. Also, violent crime 
victims ages 12 to 14 who report in the NCVS that they have 
an independent living disability and no other disability are 
classified as not having a disability to be compatible with 
age limits on disability definitions in the ACS.

********************************
Limitations of the estimates
********************************

The NCVS was designed to measure the incidence of criminal 
victimization against the U.S. civilian household population, 
excluding persons who live in institutions and the homeless. 
In this report, institutions refer to adult correctional 
facilities, juvenile facilities, nursing facilities or 
skilled nursing facilities, in-patient hospice facilities, 
residential schools for people with disabilities, and 
hospitals with patients who have no usual home elsewhere, as 
defined by the ACS. The measures of crime against persons 
with disabilities (as measured by the NCVS) cover only people 
with disabilities who are living among the general population 
in household settings. Subsequently, there is some coverage 
error in using just the noninstitutionalized population. For 
example, according to the ACS, about 96% of the 1.3 million 
persons age 65 or older living in institutions had 
disabilities in 2012. Because persons in these facilities 
would not be covered in the NCVS, estimates of violence 
against these persons are not counted. The lack of 
information from the institutions will result in an 
undercount of violence against persons with disabilities.

Certain aspects of the NCVS design can also contribute to an 
underestimation of the level or type of violence against 
persons with disabilities. For example, the survey 
instruments, modes of interview, and interviewing protocols 
used in the NCVS may not be suited for interviewing people 
with difficulty communicating, especially by telephone. Some 
people have disabilities that limit their verbal 
communication and use technology to enhance their ability to 
communicate, but many people do not have access to such 
technology.

Proxy interviews may also lead to an underestimate of 
violence against persons with disabilities. The survey 
requires direct interviews with eligible respondents and 
allows the use of proxy interviews with a caregiver or other 
eligible party in a limited set of circumstances. A proxy 
interview is allowed when a respondent is physically or 
mentally incapable of responding. The survey restrictions on 
proxy interviews were instituted because someone else may not 
know about the victimization experiences of the respondent, 
and because the person providing the information via proxy 
may be the perpetrator of the abuse or violence experienced 
by the respondent. Since proxy respondents may be more likely 
to omit crime incidents or may not know some details about 
reported crime incidents, the number or types of crimes 
against persons with disabilities may be underestimated. In 
2012, about 2% of violent crime incidents against persons 
with disabilities were obtained from proxy interviews. In 
addition, in 2012, 86% of the violent incidents against 
persons with disabilities conducted by proxy interviews were 
for simple assault, compared to about 60% of violent 
incidents against persons with disabilities conducted from 
nonproxy interviews (not shown).

*******************************************
Disability population in the United States 
*******************************************

According to the ACS, about 14% of the U.S. population age 12 
or older living outside of institutions in 2012 had a 
disability. Characteristics of the population with and 
without disabilities are compared in appendix tables 12 and 
13. In 2012, among noninstitutionalized persons with 
disabilities, 48% were male and 52% were female. Whites 
accounted for about 77% of the population with disabilities, 
blacks accounted for 14%, and persons of two or more races 
accounted for 2%. About 11% were Hispanic. About 70% of the 
population with disabilities was age 50 or older, compared to 
about 34% of the population of persons without disabilities. 
The sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age distributions of 
persons with a disability living outside of institutions did 
not change substantially between 2011 and 2012. The 2011 and 
2012 ACS population estimates of persons by disability status 
were generated from Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) data 
(see below).

*****************************************
Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) data
*****************************************

To generate populations of persons by disability status for 
2008 through 2010, the Census Bureau generated these 
estimates for the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) from the 
full, confidential ACS dataset. Due to budgetary 
restrictions, PUMS data from the Census Bureau’s ACS were 
used to calculate populations of persons by disability status 
for 2011 and 2012. The ACS PUMS dataset is a sample of 
population and housing unit records from the American 
Community Survey. Usually, the PUMS files include only about 
two-thirds of the cases contained in the larger confidential 
dataset. The ACS PUMS files include the actual responses 
collected in ACS questionnaires, although some responses have 
been edited to protect confidentiality of respondents. The 
ACS PUMS file included sample weights for each person and 
housing unit, which were applied to the individual records to 
expand the sample to estimate totals and percentages of the 
full population.


Estimates of the 2010 U.S. population by disability status 
taken from the custom tabulations from the Census Bureau were 
compared with the same estimates generated using PUMS data 
(appendix table 14). Even though the counts generated from 
custom tabulations from the Census Bureau differ from that 
generated from the PUMS data for each demographic group 
within both disability statuses, no systematic differences 
were detected. For more information on PUMS data from the 
Census Bureau, please see: 
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/data_documentation/public_use_m
icrodata_sample/.

*****************************************
Comparing 2011 computed populations to 
2011 populations generated with PUMS data
*****************************************

In the previous report, Crime Against Persons with 
Disabilities, 2009–2011 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 240299, BJS 
web, December 2012), BJS used population estimates that were 
computed using 2010 proportions of the population by 
disability status from the ACS. BJS did this because, at the 
time, the 2011 populations by disability status were not 
available from the ACS. However, the 2011 populations by 
disability status were available for this report via the PUMS 
data. BJS compared the two 2011 populations (calculated from 
the demographic information in the 2010 ACS and estimates 
from the PUMS data for the 2011 ACS) (appendix table 15). 
Even though the calculated counts differ from the ACS counts 
for each demographic group within both disability statuses, 
no systematic differences were detected between the 
calculated populations and the 2011 ACS populations generated 
with PUMS data.

********************************************
Direct standardization with the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population ***
*********************************************
Footnote 2 ?For more information on direct standardization, 
see Curtin, L.R. & Klein, R.J. (1995). Direct standardization 
(age-adjusted death rates). Healthy People 2000: Statistical 
Notes, 6 Revised. Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt06rv.pdf.***

The method used to generate age-adjusted rates of violent 
victimization presented in this report was direct 
standardization with the 2000 U.S. Standard Population from 
the Decennial Census as the standard population. Age-adjusted 
standardization eliminates the problem of different age 
distributions between and within groups. In general, persons 
with disabilities are an older population than persons 
without disabilities. Because crime rates vary by age, direct 
standardization produces age-adjusted rates that would occur 
if both populations had the same age distribution as the 
standard population. 

The 2000 U.S. Standard Population was created by the U.S. 
Census Bureau Population Projection Program 
(http://www.census.gov/population/projections/), which uses 
data from the Current Population Survey. To calculate age 
groups using the 2000 U.S. Standard Population, populations 
of single years of age were obtained for persons age 12 or 
older from the Census P25–1130 
(http://www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p25-1130.pdf) series 
estimates of the 2000 populations generated by the U. S. 
Census Bureau Population Projection Program. These single-
year populations for persons age 12 or older were then summed 
to create the following age groups: ages 12 to 15, 16 to 19, 
20 to 24, 25 to 34, 35 to 49, 50 to 64, and 65 or older. In 
this report, the total standard population refers to the 2000 
U.S. Standard Population age 12 or older. All weights created 
for this report based on the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
are not race- or sex-specific, so they do not adjust for 
differences in the racial or sex distributions between 
populations of persons with and without disabilities.

There is little difference in the race and sex distributions 
between populations of persons with and without disabilities. 
According to the 2012 ACS, among noninstitutionalized persons 
with disabilities, about 48% were male and 52% were female, 
compared to 49% of persons without disabilities being male 
and 51% being female. Whites accounted for 77% of persons 
with disabilities and 75% of persons without disabilities. 
Blacks accounted for about 14% of persons with disabilities 
and about 12% of persons without disabilities. Persons of 
other racial groups accounted for about 7% of persons with 
disabilities and about 11% of persons without disabilities. 
Persons of two or more races made up the same percentage 
(about 2%) of the population with and without disabilities. 
Hispanics accounted for about 11% of persons with 
disabilities and about 16% of persons without disabilities in 
2012. Non-Hispanics accounted for about 89% of persons with 
disabilities and about 84% of persons without disabilities.

The violent victimization rate, age-adjusted using direct 
standardization with the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
(Rd) is calculated as—

Rd = ? (wa * ra) 

where

Rd = age-adjusted rate of violent victimization of the 
population of interest calculated using direct 
standardization 

wa = weight calculated from the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
for age group a 

ra = unadjusted rate of violent victimization for age group 
a. 

The weight (wa) for age group a is calculated as— 
wa = na / N 

where

wa = weight calculated from the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
for age group a 

na = number of persons in age group a in the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population 

N = total number of persons in the 2000 U.S. Standard 
Population.

This method produces rates of violent victimization as if the 
population of interest had the same age distribution as the 
2000 U.S. Standard Population. To use this method to produce 
age-adjusted rates of violent victimization for persons with 
disabilities, ra would represent the unadjusted violent 
victimization rate against persons with disabilities in age 
group a. To calculate the violent victimization rate of 
persons without disabilities, ra would represent the 
unadjusted violent victimization rate against persons without 
disabilities in age group a.

****************
Property crime
****************
 
In the first two reports in this series, Crime Against People 
with Disabilities, 2007 (NCJ 227814, BJS web, October 2009) 
and Crime Against People with Disabilities, 2008 (NCJ 231328, 
BJS web, December 2010), property crime by disability status 
was included. These statistics are not included in this 
report due to potential underreporting of property crimes 
against persons with disabilities. The NCVS measure of 
property crime is a household-based measure. The questions 
NCVS uses to identify whether a person has a disability are 
asked only of those respondents who reported that they have 
been victimized. If the person who reports the property crime 
is a household member with a disability, then the NCVS 
identifies the property crime as one against a household that 
has a person with a disability. If a household member without 
a disability reports the property crime during the survey, 
the NCVS does not ask whether any other household member has 
a disability. For this reason, any estimate of property crime 
against people with disabilities using the NCVS may be an 
undercount of such crimes. As a result, information regarding 
property crime is not included in this report.

**************************************
Nonresponse and weighting adjustments 
**************************************

In 2012, 92,390 households and 162,940 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 87% 
for households and 87% for eligible persons. Victimizations 
that occurred outside of the United States were excluded from 
this report. In 2012, less than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States and were 
excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use data from the 2008 to 2012 NCVS 
data files weighted to produce annual estimates for persons 
age 12 or older living in U.S. households. Because the NCVS 
relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for 
survey nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.
 
The NCVS data files include both household and person 
weights. The household weight is commonly used to calculate 
estimates of property crimes, such as motor vehicle theft or 
burglary, which are identified with the household. Person 
weights provide an estimate of the population represented by 
each person in the sample. Person weights are most frequently 
used to compute estimates of crime victimizations of persons 
in the total population. After proper adjustment, both 
household and person weights are also used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

The victimization weights used in this analysis account for 
the number of persons present during an incident and for 
repeat victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of ten incidents. Series 
victimizations are victimizations that are similar in type 
but occur with such frequency that a victim is unable to 
recall each individual event or to describe each event in 
detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify 
and classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and collect detailed information on only the 
most recent incident in the series. In 2012, series incidents 
accounted for about 1% of all victimizations and 4% of all 
violent victimizations. The approach to weighting series 
incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of ten 
produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while the 
cap at ten minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the 
rates. Additional information on the series enumeration is 
detailed in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency 
Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization 
Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012.

***********************************
Standard error computations for 
percentages and unadjusted rates 
***********************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates 
based on a sample have some degree of sampling error. The 
sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses, the size 
of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for which the 
estimate is computed. When the sampling error around the 
estimates is taken into consideration, the estimates that 
appear different may not be statistically different. 

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.
 
In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in the report. For estimates, 
standard errors were based on the ratio of the sums of 
victimizations and respondents across years.

****************************************************

******************************************
Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness 
Act (Public Law 105-301), 1998 
******************************************

The Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act mandates 
that the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) include 
statistics on crimes against people with disabilities and the 
characteristics of these victims. The act was designed “to 
increase public awareness of the plight of victims of crime 
with developmental disabilities, to collect data to measure 
the magnitude of the problem, and to develop strategies to 
address the safety and justice needs of victims of crime with 
developmental disabilities.” Section 5 of the act directed 
the Department of Justice to include statistics relating to 
“the nature of crimes against people with developmental 
disabilities; and the specific characteristics of the victims 
of those crimes” in the NCVS. This report is a part of the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) series on crime against 
people with disabilities. More information can be found on 
the BJS website. Because of changes in the questionnaire, 
comparisons between 2007 data and later years should not be 
made. (See Methodology for more information on changes to the 
NCVS and ACS questionnaires.)
****************************************************

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, BJS tested the significance of all comparisons 
in the text. The primary test procedure used was Student’s t-
statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, BJS set the significance level at the 95% 
confidence level. Differences described as slight or slightly 
passed a test at the 0.10 level of statistical significance 
(90% confidence level). Caution is required when comparing 
estimates not explicitly discussed in this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals: 

* According to the NCVS, during 2011 and 2012, 49.9 % of 
simple assault against persons with disabilities involved 
victims with multiple disability types (see table 6). Using 
the GVFs, BJS determined that the estimate has a standard 
error of 3.48% (see appendix table 6). A confidence interval 
around the estimate was generated by multiplying the standard 
errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed 
distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the confidence interval around the 
49.9% estimate from 2011 and 2012 is 49.9% + 3.48% x ± 1.96 
or (43.08% to 56.72%). In others words, if different samples 
using the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population 
during 2011 and 2012, 95% of the time the percentage of 
violent crimes against persons with disabilities in which the 
victim had multiple disability types would fall between 
43.08% and 56.72%.

In this report, a coefficient of variation (CV), representing 
the ratio of the standard error to the estimate, was also 
calculated for all estimates. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate based on 10 or 
fewer sample cases, or coefficient of variation is greater 
than 50%).

***********************************************
Standard error computations and statistical 
significance for age-adjusted rates *** 
***********************************************
Footnote 3 ?For more information on computing standard errors 
for age-adjusted rates, see Anderson, R.N., & Rosenberg, H.M. 
(1998). Age Standardization of Death Rates: Implementation 
of the Year 2000 Standard. National Vital Statistics Reports, 
47 (3). Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr47/nvs47_03.pdf.***

Due to the complexity in generating age-adjusted rates of 
violent crime, other methods were used to compute standard 
errors and determine statistical significance. For each age-
adjusted rate, variances were computed for each age group-
specific rate using information from the generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters that the Census Bureau produced for 
the NCVS. For each age group, the variance was multiplied by 
the squared weight for that particular age group in the 2000 
U.S. Standard Population. The result was then summed across 
all age groups to produce the variance for the age-adjusted 
rate. The square root of this variance was taken to produce 
the standard error of the age-adjusted rate. To calculate 
statistical significance among two age adjusted rates, the 
standard errors were computed for each rate.  Next, the 
estimated standard error for the difference of the two rates 
was calculated.  This was done by taking the square root of 
the sum of each rate’s squared standard error (that is, Se12 
+ Se22). The absolute difference in the rates was divided by 
the estimated standard error for the difference to generate a 
t-statistic.  If the t-statistic was greater than 1.96, the 
difference was statistically significant.  If it was equal to 
or less than 1.96, the difference between the two rates was 
not statistically significant.

************
2011 rates
************

All 2011 rates of victimization presented in this report 
differ from those presented in the previous version of this 
report. The Census Bureau found an error with the 2011 single 
year incident level NCVS data file and its accompanying 
weight. The 2011 single year file was revised with a new 
weight; as a result, there was a slight change in the 
estimates. The 2011 rates were generated from the corrected 
data file and weight.

****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office 
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

These statistical tables were prepared by Erika Harrell, 
Ph.D. Rachel Morgan, Ph.D., provided verification. 
Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

February 2014, NCJ 244525
*****************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
2/10/2014/JER/3:15pm
**********************



