U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4781

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=6
---------------------------------------------------------

***********
Bulletin
***********

Criminal Victimization, 2012

Jennifer Truman, Ph.D., Lynn Langton, Ph.D., and Michael 
Planty, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians

In 2012, for the second consecutive year, violent and 
property crime rates increased for U.S. residents age 12 or 
older, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The overall 
violent crime rate (which includes rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated and simple assault) rose from 22.6 
victimizations per 1,000 persons in 2011 to 26.1 in 2012 
(figure 1). Violent victimizations that were not reported to 
police increased from a rate of 10.8 per 1,000 persons in 
2011 to 14.0 in 2012 and accounted for the majority of the 
increase in total violence. The apparent increase in the rate 
of violent crimes reported to police from 2011 to 2012 was 
not statistically significant. 

The overall property crime rate (which includes household 
burglary, theft, and motor vehicle theft) increased from 
138.7 per 1,000 households in 2011 to 155.8 per 1,000 in 
2012. Similar to violent crime, the rate for property crime 
not reported to police increased during the period, from 86.1 
to 101.9 victimizations per 1,000 households. However, there 
was no statistically significant change in the rate of 
property crime victimization reported to police.

*********************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS 
************

* The rate of violent victimization increased from 22.6 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 2011 
to 26.1 in 2012. Crime not reported to police and simple 
assault accounted for the majority of this increase.

* Violent victimizations not reported police increased 
from 10.8 per 1,000 persons in 2011 to 14.0 in 2012.

* The apparent increase in the number and rate of serious 
violent crime from 2011 to 2012 was not statistically 
significant. 

* The rate of property crime increased from 138.7 per 1,000 
households in 2011 to 155.8 in 2012.

* From 2011 to 2012, there were no statistically significant 
changes in the rates of domestic violence, violence involving 
an injury, or firearm violence.

* In 2012, 44% of violent victimizations and 54% of serious 
violent victimizations were reported to police. 

* There was no significant change in the percentage of crime 
victims receiving assistance from victim service agencies 
from 2011 to 2012 (about 8%). 

* Violent crime rates increased slightly in 2012 for blacks 
but remained stable for whites and Hispanics. 

* In 2012, residents in urban areas continued to experience 
the highest rate of violent crime.

*********************************************************

***************************************
Increase in simple assault accounted 
for majority of the rise in total 
violence from 2011 to 2012
**************************************

The rate of violent crime increased from 22.6 victimizations 
per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 2011 to 26.1 per 1,000 
in 2012 (table 1). The number of violent victimizations rose 
from 5.8 million in 2011 to 6.8 million in 2012. When 
examined by crime type, this increase in the rate and number 
of violent crimes was largely due to an increase in simple 
assault. In 2012, the rate of simple assault was 18.2 per 
1,000, up from 15.4 in 2011. The apparent increase in the 
rate of serious violent crime--defined as rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault--to 8.0 per 1,000 
was not statistically significant. In 2012, the rates of 
serious violent crime and simple assault were lower than in 
2003.

**********************************************************

*********************************
The National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS)
*********************************

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and 
not reported to the police against persons age 12 or older 
from a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. 
It produces national rates and levels of violent and property 
victimization, as well as information on the characteristics 
of crimes and victims, and the consequences of victimization. 
Since the NCVS is based on interviews with victims, it does 
not measure homicide. 

The NCVS measures the violent crimes of rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. The 
NCVS classifies rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated 
assault as serious violent crimes. Property crimes include 
household burglary, motor vehicle theft, 
and theft. The survey also measures personal larceny, 
which includes pick pocketing and purse snatching. For 
additional estimates not included in this report, see the 
NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the BJS website. 

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout 
this report. Victimization is a crime as it affects one 
person or household. For personal crimes, the number of 
victimizations is equal to the number of victims present 
during a criminal incident. The number of victimizations may 
be greater than the number of incidents because more than one 
person may be victimized during an incident. Each crime 
against a household is counted as having a single victim, the 
affected household. 

The victimization rate is a measure of the occurrence of 
victimizations among a specified population group. For 
personal crimes, this is based on the number of 
victimizations per 1,000 residents age 12 or older. For 
household crimes, the victimization rate is calculated using 
the number of incidents per 1,000 households.
**********************************************************

***************************************
No significant change in the rate 
of domestic violence from 2011 to 2012
***************************************

The rate of domestic violence--crime committed by intimate 
partners and family members--remained stable from 2011 to 
2012 (5 per 1,000) (table 1). No measurable change was 
detected from 2011 to 2012 in rates of intimate partner 
violence--victimizations committed by current or former 
spouses, boyfriends, or girlfriends--(3 per 1,000) or rates 
of serious violent crime involving weapons (5 per 1,000) or 
injury to the victim (3 per 1,000). The rates of serious 
violent crime involving weapons or injury to the victim in 
2012 were lower than rates in 2003.

***************************************
No significant change in firearm 
violence from 2011 to 2012
***************************************

There was no measurable change in the rate of firearm 
violence from 2011 to 2012 and from 2003 to 2012 (table 2). 
In 2003, 2011, and 2012, the rate of firearm violence was 
approximately 2.0 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or 
older. In 2012, firearms were used in about 7% of all violent 
crime incidents. This percentage has been relatively stable 
over the past decade. In 2012, about 66% of all serious 
violent crimes that involved a firearm were reported to 
police. There was no measurable change in the rates of 
firearm violence reported and not reported to police from 
2011 to 2012. 

********************************
The homicide rate declined 48% 
from 1993 to 2011
********************************

Since the NCVS interviews victims of crimes, homicide is not 
included in nonfatal victimization estimates. Homicide rates 
are based on data from the Center for Disease Control’s Vital 
Statistics System.***Footnote 1 The CDC’s Vital Statistics re 
one of two national sources of data on homicide 
victimization. Rates of homicide are also available through 
the FBI’s Supplemental Homicide Report (SHR). Rates of 
homicide may differ slightly depending on which source is 
used.*** From 1993 to 2011, the rate of homicide declined 
48%, from 9.9 to 5.1 homicides per 100,000 persons (figure 
2).  Over the past 10 years, from 2002 to 2011, the rate 
declined from 6.1 to 5.1 homicides per 100,000, with the 
majority of the decline occurring from 2008 to 2011. 

**********************************
Thefts accounted for majority of 
increase in property crime
**********************************

The number and rate of property crime victimization increased 
from 2011 to 2012 (table 3). In 2012, the number of property 
crimes (19.6 million) rose to a similar level seen a decade 
earlier in 2003 (19.8 million). The rate of property crime 
victimization increased from 138.7 per 1,000 households in 
2011 to 155.8 in 2012, and was driven primarily by an 
increase in theft. The rate of theft victimization increased 
from 104.2 per 1,000 households in 2011 to 120.9 in 2012, 
while no measurable change occurred in the rates of burglary 
and motor vehicle theft during the same period.

***************************************
In 2012, 44% of violent victimizations 
were reported to police
***************************************

The NCVS allows for an examination of crimes reported and not 
reported to police. Victims may not report the  
victimization for a variety of reasons, including fear of 
reprisal or getting the offender in trouble, believing  

that police would not or could not do anything to help, and 
believing the crime to be a personal issue or trivial.  
Police notification can come from the victim, a third party 
(including witnesses, other victims, household members, or 
other officials, such as school officials or workplace 
managers), or police being at the scene of the incident.  
Police notification may occur during or immediately following 
a criminal incident or at a later date. 

From 2011 to 2012, there was no statistically significant 
change in the percentage of violent and serious violent 
victimizations reported to police (table 4). In 2012, 44% of 
violent victimizations and about 54% of serious violent 
victimizations were reported to police. A greater percentage 
of robbery (56%) and aggravated assault (62%) victimizations 
were reported to police, compared to simple assault (40%) and 
rape or sexual assault (28%)  
victimizations. The percentage of violence involving a weapon 
that was reported to police decreased from 67% in 2011 to 56% 
in 2012.

From 2011 to 2012, the percentage of property victimizations 
reported to police declined from 37% to 34%. The percentage 
of reported thefts declined from 30% to 26% during the same 
period, accounting for the majority of the decline in the 
overall percentage of property victimizations that were 
reported to police. No measurable change was detected in the 
percentage of burglaries and motor vehicle thefts that were 
reported to police from 2011 to 2012. Similar to previous 
years, in 2012 a larger percentage of motor vehicle thefts 
(79%) than burglaries (55%) and other thefts (26%) were 
reported to police.

***************************************
Violent victimization rate for crimes 
not reported to police increased
***************************************

From 2011 to 2012, no difference was detected in the rate of 
violent victimization reported to police (table 5).  
The violent victimization rate for crimes not reported to 
police increased from 10.8 to 14.0 per 1,000 persons ages 12 
or older. For serious violence, the rate of reported 
victimizations remained stable from 2011 to 2012 (4 per 
1,000), while the rate of unreported victimizations increased 
slightly, from 2.6 per 1,000 persons in 2011 to 3.5 in 2012. 
From 2011 to 2012, the rate of simple assault not reported to 
police increased from 8.2 to 10.6 per 1,000 persons, but no 
change was detected in the rate of simple assault reported to 
police (approximately 7.0 per 1,000).

From 2011 to 2012, no measurable change was observed in the 
rate of total property crime victimization reported to 
police. In 2012, victims reported to police about 52 property 
crimes per 1,000 households. The rate of property crime not 
reported to police increased from 86.1 per 1,000 households 
in 2011 to 101.9 in 2012.
 
There was no measurable change in the rate of theft 
victimizations reported to police from 2011 to 2012. However, 
among theft victimizations not reported to police, the rate 
of victimization increased from 71.6 per 1,000 households in 
2011 to 87.7 in 2012, accounting for the majority of the 
overall increase in property crime. 

***************************************
In 2012, 8% of violent crime victims 
received assistance from a victim 
service agency
***************************************

Victim service agencies are publicly or privately funded 
organizations that provide victims with support and services 
to aid their physical and emotional recovery, offer 
protection from future victimizations, guide them through the 
criminal justice system process, and assist them in obtaining 
restitution. From 2011 to 2012, there was no change in the 
percentage of violent crime victims who received assistance 
from a victim service agency (approximately 8%) (table 6). In 
2012, a greater percentage of rape or sexual assault victims 
(22%) received assistance than victims of robbery (6%), 
aggravated assault (8%), or simple assault (8%).

**********************************************************

***************************************
The composition of violent crime 
remained stable from 1993 to 2012
***************************************

From 1993 to 2012, overall violent victimization declined 
from a rate of 79.8 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to 26.1 
per 1,000. All types of violent crime (rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault) declined 
during this period (figure 3). While the rates of violent 
victimization have changed over time, the general composition 
of violent victimization has remained relatively stable 
(figure 4). 

From 1993 to 2012, approximately 70% of all violent 
victimizations were simple assaults. Serious violence 
accounted for the remainder of violent victimizations, with 
relative stability in the distributions of rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault from 1993 to 2012. 
During this period, aggravated assault accounted for about 
20% of all violent victimizations; robbery for 10%; and rape 
or sexual assault for 5%. 
**********************************************************

***************************************
Violent crime increased slightly for 
blacks but remained stable for whites 
and Hispanics 
***************************************

From 2011 to 2012, rates of violent and serious violent 
victimization did not change significantly for either males 
or females (table 7). In 2012, males had higher rates of 
violent and serious violent victimization than females.

The rate of violent victimization for non-Hispanic blacks 
increased from 26.4 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 2011 
to 34.2 per 1,000 in 2012. Both the rates for non-Hispanic 
whites and Hispanics remained flat from 2011 to 2012. In 
2011, there were no measurable differences in the violent 
crime rates for blacks, whites, or Hispanics,  
while in 2012, the rate for blacks (34.2 per 1,000) was 
higher than the rates for whites (25.2 per 1,000) and  
Hispanics (24.5 per 1,000).

Rates of serious violent victimization for whites, blacks, 
and Hispanics remained stable from 2011 to 2012. Similar to 
2011, the rate of serious violence in 2012 for blacks (11.3 
per 1,000) was higher than the rate for whites (6.8 per 
1,000). 

From 2011 to 2012, violent victimization rates increased for 
persons ages 35 to 49, from 21.9 to 29.1 per 1,000.  
Persons ages 12 to 17 and 25 to 34 experienced a slight 
increase in violence in this same period, while the rates  
of violent victimization for all other age groups remained 
flat. There was no measurable change in the rates of serious 
violence for any age groups from 2011 to 2012. Similar to 
2011, persons ages 12 to 24 had higher rates of violent 
victimization than persons age 35 or older in 2012.

Rates of violent victimization remained flat from 2011 to 
2012 for persons of all marital statuses other than those who 
were widowed. Violent victimization rates for persons who 
were widowed increased from 3.8 per 1,000 in 2011 to 8.3 in 
2012. Married persons generally had the lowest rates of 
violence compared to persons never married, divorced, or 
separated, and this was also observed in 2012. Married 
persons experienced 13.5 victimizations per 1,000 persons in 
2012, compared to 37.0 for divorced, 40.7 for never married, 
and 83.1 for separated persons. The NCVS collects information 
on a respondent’s current marital status at the time of the 
interview, but does not obtain marital status at the time of 
the incident. For example, persons who are separated may have 
experienced a victimization while married.

***************************************
Residents in urban areas continued 
to experience the highest rate of 
violent victimization
***************************************

From 2011 to 2012, the rates of violent and serious violent 
victimization increased for persons residing in the West 
(table 8). The rate of crime in the West increased from 27.1 
violent victimizations per 1,000 persons to 35.5 per 1,000, 
and from 8.4 serious violent victimizations per 1,000 persons 
to 12.5 per 1,000. No measurable change was observed in the 
rate of violent victimization for residents living in the 
Northeast, Midwest, or South during this period. Residents 
living in the West had higher rates of violent victimization 
(35.5 per 1,000) than residents in other regions of the 
country in 2012. 

There was no measurable change from 2011 to 2012 in the rates 
of violent victimization for urban, rural, or suburban areas. 
The apparent increase in the rate of violence against urban 
residents was not statistically significant. In 2012, the 
rate of violent victimization was 32.4 per 1,000 in urban 
areas, 23.8 per 1,000 in suburban areas, and 20.9 in rural 
areas. As in prior years, urban residents had higher rates of 
violent and serious violent victimization than suburban and 
rural residents. 

From 2011 to 2012, property crime rates increased in all 
regions of the country. Households in the West had the 
highest rate of property victimization at 210.5 per 1,000 
households. Rates of property crime also increased for 
households in urban, rural, and suburban areas. Similar to 
violent crime, households in urban areas had higher rates of 
property crime than households in suburban and rural areas. 

**********************************************************

***************************************
The NCVS and UCR show somewhat different 
change in crime from 2011 to 2012
***************************************

The annual increase in violent victimizations in 2012, based 
on the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National  
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), was consistent with the 
overall increase in violent crime shown in the findings  
from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program (table 
9). The increase in property victimizations from the NCVS was 
inconsistent with the FBI’s finding of a slight decline in 
overall property crime. 

Since the NCVS and UCR measure an overlapping, but not 
identical, set of offenses and use different methodologies, 
congruity between the estimates is not expected. Throughout 
the 40-year history of the NCVS, both programs have generally 
demonstrated similar year-to-year increases or decreases in 
the levels of overall violent and property crimes. However, 
this has not been the case for some years and for many 
specific crime types. 

As measured by the UCR, violent crime includes murder and 
nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and  

aggravated assault. Property crime includes burglary, 
larceny-theft, arson, and motor vehicle theft. The UCR 
measures crimes known to the police, occurring against both 
persons and businesses. The FBI obtains data on crimes from 
law enforcement agencies, while the NCVS collects data 
through interviews with victims. Additional information about 
the differences between the two programs can be found in The 
Nation’s Two Crime Measures, NCJ 122705, BJS web, October 
2004. 

Significant methodological and definitional differences exist 
between the NCVS and UCR:

* The NCVS obtains estimates of crimes both reported and not 
reported to the police, while the UCR collects data on crimes 
known to and recorded by the police. 

* The UCR includes homicide, arson, and commercial crimes, 
while the NCVS excludes these crime types. 

* The UCR excludes simple assault and sexual assault, which 
are included in the NCVS.***Footnote 2 Simple assaults  
include attacks or attempted attacks without a weapon 
resulting in either no injury or minor injury. Sexual  
assaults include attacks or attempted attacks generally 
involving unwanted sexual contact between the victim and  
offender that may or may not involve force.***

* The NCVS data are estimates from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households, whereas the UCR 
data are based on the actual counts of offenses reported by 
law enforcement jurisdictions. 

* The NCVS excludes crimes against children age 11 or 
younger, persons in institutions (e.g., nursing homes and 
correctional institutions), and may exclude highly mobile 
populations and the homeless; however, victimizations against 
these persons may be included in the UCR. 
Given these differences, the two measures of crime should be 
considered to complement each other and provide a more 
comprehensive picture of crime in the United States. 

The number of violent crimes known to the police as measured 
by the UCR increased by 0.7%, from 2011 to 2012, and the 
number of property crimes declined by about 0.9%. During the 
same period, the number of violent crimes in the  

NCVS increased by 17.7% and the number of property crimes 
increased by 15.0%. The UCR reported slight increases in the 
number of homicides (up 1.1%), aggravated assaults (up 1.1%), 
and motor vehicle theft (up 0.6%), and reported declines in 
the number of robberies (down 0.1%) and burglaries (down 
3.7%). The number of robberies reported in the  

NCVS slightly increased by 33.1%. The NCVS did not measure a 
statistically significant change in either the overall number 
of victimizations or the number of victimizations reported to 
police for other crime types.
**********************************************************

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and 
other theft) both reported and not reported to police. In 
addition to providing annual level and change estimates on 
criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of 
information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents.
 
Survey respondents provide information about themselves 
(e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, 
education level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. Information is collected for each 
victimization incident, about the offender (e.g., age, race 
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and experiences 
with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months 
either in person or over the phone for a total of seven 
interviews. 


Generally, all first interviews are conducted in-person. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in sample for the 
3-year period. The sample includes persons living in group 
quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious 
group dwellings, and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings, such as correctional or 
hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For more information, 
see the Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the 
United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS web, May 2011.)

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
****************************************

In 2012, 92,390 households and 162,940 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 87% 
for households and 87% for eligible persons.  
Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States 
were excluded from this report. In 2012, less than 1% of the 
unweighted victimizations occurred outside of the United 
States and were excluded from the analyses. 

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2012 NCVS 
data files, weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Since the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a 
census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to 
inflate sample point estimates to known population totals and 
to compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the 
sample design. 

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Household weights 
provide an estimate of the U.S. household population 
represented by each household in the sample. After proper 
adjustment, both household and person weights are also 
typically used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (or series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail.  

Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and 
classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and to collect detailed information on only 
the most recent incident in the series. 

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in rather large increases in the level of violent 
victimization; however, trends in violence are generally 
similar regardless of whether series victimizations are 
included. 

In 2012, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations.  
Weighting series incidents as the number of incidents up to a 
maximum of 10 incidents produces more reliable estimates of 
crime levels, while the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of 
extreme outliers on the rates. Additional information on the 
series enumeration is detailed in the report Methods for 
Counting High Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the National 
Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012.

Standard error computations
****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with 
the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate 
to another estimate or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates 
based on a sample have some degree of sampling error. The 
sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses, and the 
size of the sample. When the sampling error around an 
estimate is taken into account, the estimates that appear 
different may not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small 
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the 
true value than an estimate with a large standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are 
associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution. 

In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in this report. 

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers and percentages in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The Student’s t-statistic was the primary test 
procedure, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

* According to the NCVS, in 2012, the violent victimization 
rate among persons age 12 or older was 26.1 per 1,000 persons 
(see table 1). Using the GVFs, it was determined that the 
estimated victimization rate estimate has a standard error of 
1.2 (see appendix table 2). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard errors by 
±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two- tailed distribution that 
excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Therefore, 
the 95% confidence interval around the 26.1 estimate from 
2012 is 26.1 ± (1.2 X 1.96) or (23.8 to 28.5). In others 
words, if different samples using the same procedures were 
taken from the U.S. population in 2012, 95% of the time the 
violent victimization rate would fall between 23.8 and 28.5 
per 1,000 persons.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (Interpret data with caution. Estimate based on 10 or 
fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation is 
greater than 50%).


National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS) restoration and redesign
*************************************

In 1972, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) instituted 
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), formerly 
known as the National Crime Survey (NCS), to produce national 
estimates of the levels and characteristics of criminal 
victimization in the United States, including crime not 
reported to police departments. Along with the FBI’s Uniform 
Crime Reporting (UCR) Program, the NCVS constitutes a key 
component of our nation’s system to measure the extent and 
nature of crime in the United States.

In 2008, BJS sponsored an expert panel study carried out by 
the National Research Council of the National Academies to 
review the survey’s methodology and provide guidelines for 
options to redesign the NCVS. The panel’s recommendations are 
contained in Surveying Victims: Options for Conducting the 
National Crime Victimization Survey (National Research 
Council, 2008). In response to these recommendations, BJS 
initiated a two-prong approach to redesign and restore the 
NCVS with the ultimate goals to improve the survey’s 
methodology, contain costs, assure sustainability, increase 
value to national and local stakeholders, and better meet the 
challenges of measuring the extent, characteristics, and 
consequences of criminal victimization. 

To restore the quality of the NCVS data, BJS and the U.S. 
Census Bureau implemented two large-scale interventions.  
First, the number of sample cases was increased to improve 
the stability and precision of national and subgroup 
estimates of victimization. Second, in late 2011, refresher 
training and performance monitoring of field  

representatives (FR) were initiated to improve the quality 
and costs associated with data collection. The effects of 
these interventions have been monitored in an effort to 
maintain consistent year-to-year comparisons. BJS continues 
to evaluate the impact of each on-going intervention on 
criminal victimization estimates and other estimates of data 
quality, including response rates and measures of interview 
quality.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
******************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they 
are not comparable to estimates from other years.

Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by 
BJS and the Census Bureau found a high degree of  
confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 
and 2012 are consistent with and comparable to  
estimates for 2005 and previous years. The reports, Criminal 
Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, December 2007;  
Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, December 2008; 
Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, September 2009;  
Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; 
Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 235508, September 2011;  
and Criminal Victimization, 2011, NCJ 239437, 
October 2012, are available on the BJS website.

****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects,  
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the  
operation of justice systems at all levels of government. 
William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., Lynn 
Langton, Ph.D., and Michael Planty, Ph.D. Rachel E.  
Morgan, Ph.D., verified the report.

Morgan Young edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Morgan 
Young produced the report.

October 2013, NCJ 243389
****************************************************

***********************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************
9/24/13/JER/9:30am
************************

