U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------------
Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the United
States, 2006

August  2008,  NCJ 223436

-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cvusst.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cvus
-------------------------------------------------------------

Cathy T. Maston
BJS Information Specialist

-------------------------------------------------------------

Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the United
States, 2006

The survey results contained in this report are based on data
gathered from residents living throughout the United States,
including persons living in group quarters, such as
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings. 
Crew members of merchant vessels, Armed Forces personnel
living in military barracks, and institutionalized persons,
such as correctional facility inmates, were not included in
the scope of this survey.  Similarly, U.S. citizens residing
abroad and foreign visitors to this country were excluded. 
With these exceptions, individuals age 12 or older living in
units selected for the sample were eligible to be
interviewed.

Data Collection

Each housing unit selected for the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) remains in the sample for three
years, with each of seven interviews taking place at 6 month
intervals.  An NCVS interviewer's first contact with a
housing unit selected for the survey is in person.  The
interviewer may then conduct subsequent interviews by
telephone.

To elicit more accurate reporting of incidents, NCVS uses the
self-respondent method which calls for the direct
interviewing of each person 12 years or older in the
household.  An exception is made to use proxy interviewing
instead of direct interviewing for the following three cases: 
12- and 13 year old persons when a knowledgeable household
member insists they not be interviewed directly,
incapacitated persons, and individuals absent from the
household during the entire field-interviewing period.  In
the case of temporarily absent household members and persons
who are physically or mentally incapable of granting
interviews, interviewers may accept other household members
as proxy respondents, and in certain situations non-household
members may provide information for incapacitated persons.

Some interviews were conducted using Computer-Assisted
Telephone Interviewing (CATI), a data collection mode which
involves interviewing from centralized facilities and using a
computerized instrument.  In the CATI-eligible part of the
sample, all interviews are done by telephone whenever
possible, except for the first interview, which is primarily
conducted in person.  The telephone interviews are conducted
by the CATI facilities in Hagerstown, Maryland and Tucson,
Arizona.

Sample Design and Size

Survey estimates are derived from a stratified, multi-stage
cluster sample.  The primary sampling units (PSU=s) composing
the first stage of the sample were counties, groups of
counties, or large metropolitan areas.  Large PSU=s were
included in the sample automatically and are considered to be
self-representing (SR) since all of them were selected.  The
remaining PSU=s, called non-self-representing (NSR), because
only a subset of them was selected, were combined into strata
by grouping PSU=s with similar geographic and demographic
characteristics, as determined by the 1990 Census. 

The initial 1990 design consisted of 93 SR PSU=s and 152 NSR
strata, with one PSU per stratum selected with probability
proportionate to population size.  A sample reduction was
done in October of 1996, reducing the number of NSR PSUs by
42.  So, the current NCVS sample consists of 110 NSR PSUs. 
The NCVS sample design continued use of both 1980- and 
1990-based sample through 1997. Beginning in 1998 only
1990-based sample remains.

In the second stage of sampling, each selected stratification
PSU is divided into four non-overlapping frames (unit, area,
permit, and group quarters) from which NCVS independently
selects its sample.  From each selected stratification PSU,
clusters of approximately four housing units or housing unit
equivalents are selected from each frame.  For the unit and
group quarters frames, addresses come from the 1990 Census. 
For the permit frame, addresses come from building permit
data obtained from building permit offices.  This ensures
that units built after the 1990 Census are included in the
sample.  For the area frame, sample blocks come from the 1990
Census files.  Then, addresses are listed and sampled in the
field.  A new sample, based on addresses drawn from the 2000
census, began to be phased in 2005.
 
The actual number of households and persons interviewed in
the NCVS sample varies slightly from year to year. 
Information on the number of households and persons
interviewed by year is presented below. (Also see spreadsheet
at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mresp.
csv).

In order to conduct field interviews, the sample is divided
into six groups, or rotations, and each group of households
are interviewed once every six months over a period of three
years.  The initial interview is used to bound the interviews
(bounding establishes a time frame to avoid duplication of
crimes on subsequent interviews), but is not used to compute
the annual estimates.  Each rotation group is further divided
into six panels. A different panel of households,
corresponding to one sixth of each rotation group, is
interviewed each month during the 6-month period.  Because
the survey is continuous, newly constructed housing units are
selected as described, and assigned to rotation groups and
panels for subsequent incorporation into the sample. A new
rotation group enters the sample every six  months, replacing
a group phased out after being in the sample for three years.
(Also see spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mmon.
csv).

Selection of Cases for CATI

Until March 2003, the NCVS sample PSU=s fell into three
groups of CATI usage: maximum-CATI PSU=s, where all the
segments in the PSU are CATI-eligible; half-CATI PSU=s, where
half of the segments in the PSU are randomly designated to be
CATI-eligible; and no CATI PSU=s, where none of the segments
are CATI-eligible.  The level of CATI usage for each PSU was
established with concern toward an optimal workload for the
field interviewers. In the "half-CATI" PSU=s, a random sample
of about 50% of the segments in each PSU is taken and
designated as CATI-eligible.  Beginning March 2003, addresses
in all segments became eligible for CATI interviewing .  CATI
cases are interviewed from CATI facilities while the other
sample cases are interviewed by the standard NCVS field
procedures.

Collection Year Estimates

The data presented in the tables were collected during the
calendar year being estimated.  Because of the retrospective
nature of the survey, the estimates include some incidents
that actually occurred during the previous year.  Analyses
comparing the victimization information collected in a
calendar year (termed a collection year) to that obtained
about victimizations experienced in the same calendar year
(called a data year) show only a small difference between the
two methods.  The differences will be greater during periods
of changing crime rates and less during periods of stable
rates.

New Race Information

In 1997 the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) introduced
new guidelines for the collection and reporting of race and
ethnicity data in government surveys. These methodological
changes were implemented for all demographic surveys as of
January 1, 2003.  Individuals are now allowed to choose more
than one race category.  In prior years they were asked to
select a single primary race.
 
Racial categories presented in these tables now consist of
the following: white only, black only, other race only
(American Indian, Alaska Native, Asian, Pacific Islander if
only one of these races is given), and two or more races (all
persons of any race indicating two or more races. Individuals
are now asked whether they are of Hispanic ethnicity before
being asked about their race, and are now asked directly if
they are Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino. 

Estimation Procedure

Annual collection year estimates of the levels and rates of
victimization are derived by accumulating four quarterly
estimates. The weights of all crimes reported during
interviews in that year are summed, regardless of when the
crime occurred. The base for the collection year rate for
personal crime is the sum of all person weights. Likewise,
the base for the property crime rates is the sum of all
household weights.

The estimation procedure begins with the application of a
base weight to the data from each individual interviewed. 
The base weight is the reciprocal of the probability of each
unit's selection for the sample, and provides a rough measure
of the population represented by each person in the sample. 
Next, an adjustment is made to account for households and
individuals in occupied units who were selected for the
survey but unavailable for an interview.

In addition to adjusting for unequal probabilities of
selection and observation, the final weight also includes a
ratio adjustment to known population totals based on the
adjusted counts from the 1990 Census.  Specifically, the
final person weight is the product of the values of the
following six component weights; the final household weight
is the product of all components except the within-household
non-interview adjustment component detailed below:

Probabilities of selection 

*Base weight: the inverse of the sample unit=s probability of
selection. 

*Weighting control factor: adjusts for any subsampling due to
unexpected events in the field, such as unusually high growth
in new construction, area segments larger than anticipated,
and other deviations from the overall stratum sampling rate.

Probabilities of observation (Nonresponse)

*Household non interview adjustment: adjusts for nonresponse
at the household level by inflating the weight assigned to
interviewed households so that they represent themselves and
non interviewed households.

*Within household non interview adjustment: adjusts for
nonresponse at the person level by inflating the weight
assigned to the interviewed persons so that they represent
themselves and the missed interviews.

Post stratification ratio adjustment to known population
totals 

The distribution of the sample population may differ somewhat
from that of the total population in terms of age, race, sex,
residence, and other characteristics. Because of this, two
stages of ratio estimation are employed to bring the two
distributions into closer agreement, thereby reducing the
variability of the sample estimates.

*First stage factor:  the first stage of ratio estimation is
applied only to on self representing PSU=s. Its purpose is to
reduce sampling error caused by selecting one PSU to
represent an entire stratum.  It adjusts for race and zone of
residence  differences between the sample 
non-self-representing PSU=s and the population 
non-self-representing PSU=s (for self representing PSU=s this
factor is set to 1). 

*Second stage factor:  the second stage of ratio estimation
is applied on an individual basis to bring the distribution
of individuals in the sample into closer agreement with
independent current estimates of the population according to
age, sex, and race characteristics . This factor is defined
for each person to adjust for the difference between weighted
counts of persons (using the above five weight components)
and independent estimates of the number of persons, within
the defined cells. These independent estimates are
projections based on the 2000 Census population controls
adjusted for the undercount.

For household crimes, the characteristics of the wife in a
husband-wife household and the characteristics of the head of
household in other types of households are used to determine
the ratio adjustment factors. This procedure is considered
more precise than simply using the characteristics of the
head of household since sample coverage is generally better
for females than males.

For estimates involving incidents rather than victimizations,
further adjustments are made to those cases where an incident
involved more than one person. These incidents have more than
one chance of being included in the sample so each
multiple-victimization is reduced by the number of victims. 
Thus, if two people are victimized during the same incident,
the weight assigned to that incident is the person weight
reduced by one-half so that the incident cannot be counted
twice. However, the details of the event's outcome as they
related to the victim are reflected in the survey results. 
No adjustment is necessary in estimating data on household
crimes because each separate crime is defined as involving
only one household.

Series Victimizations

A series victimization is defined as six or more similar but
separate crimes which the victim is unable to recall
individually or describe in detail to an interviewer. These
series crimes have been excluded from the tables because the
victims were unable to provide details for each event.  Data
on series crimes are gathered by the calendar quarter(s) of
occurrence, making it possible to match the time frames used
in tabulating the data for non-series crimes (See Table 110).

The effect of combining series and non-series crimes,
counting each of the series crimes as a single victimization
based on the details of the most recent incident, was
included in the initial release of the 1980 data. The report
showed that victimization counts and rates were higher in
1979 and 1980 when the series crimes were added. However,
rate changes between these two years were basically in the
same direction and significantly affected the same crimes as
those affected when only non-series crimes were analyzed.

Accuracy of Estimates

The accuracy of an estimate is a measure of its total error,
that is, the sum of all the errors affecting the estimate: 
sampling error as well as nonsampling error. 

The sample used for the NCVS is one of a large number of
possible samples of equal size that could have been obtained
by using the same sample design and selection procedures. 
Estimates derived from different samples would differ from
one another due to sampling variability, or sampling error.

The standard error of a survey estimate is a measure of the
variation among that estimates from all possible samples. 
Therefore, it is a measure of the precision (reliability)
with which a particular estimate approximates the average
result of all possible samples.  The estimate and its
associated standard error may be used to construct a
confidence interval. A confidence interval is a range of
numbers which has a specified probability that the average of
all possible samples, which is the true unknown value of
interest in an unbiased design, is contained within the
interval. About 68% of the time, the survey estimate will
differ from the true average by less than one standard error. 
Only 10% of the time will the difference be more than 1.6
standard errors, and just one time in 100 will it be greater
than 2.5 standard errors. A 95% confidence interval is the
survey estimate plus or minus about twice the standard error,
thus there is a 95% chance that the result of a complete
census would fall within the confidence interval.

In addition to sampling error, the estimates in this report
are subject to nonsampling error.  While substantial care is
taken in the NCVS to reduce the sources of nonsampling error
throughout all the survey operations, by means of a quality
assurance program, quality controls, operational controls,
and error-correcting procedures, an unquantified amount of
nonsampling error remains still.

Major sources of nonsampling error are related to the
inability of the respondents to recall in detail the crimes
which occurred during the six months prior to the interview. 
Research based on interviews of victims obtained from police
files indicates that assault is recalled with the least
accuracy of any crime measured by the NCVS.  This may be
related to the tendency of victims to not report crimes
committed by offenders who are not strangers, especially if
they are relatives. In addition, among certain groups, crimes
which contain elements of assault could be a part of everyday
life, and are therefore forgotten or not considered important
enough to mention to a survey interviewer. These recall
problems may result in an understatement of the actual rate
of assault. 

Another source of nonsampling error is the inability of some
respondents to recall the exact month a crime occurred, even
though it was placed in the correct reference period. This
error source is partially offset by interviewing monthly and
using the estimation procedure described earlier. Telescoping
is another problem in which incidents that occurred before
the reference period are placed within the period. The effect
of telescoping is minimized by using the bounding procedure
previously described. The interviewer is provided with a
summary of the incidents reported in the preceding interview
and, if a similar incident is reported, it can be determined
whether or not it is a new one by discussing it with the
victim. Events which occurred after the reference period are
set aside for inclusion with the data from the following
interview. 

Other sources of nonsampling error can result from other
types of response mistakes, including errors in reporting
incidents as crimes, misclassification of crimes, systematic
data errors introduced by the interviewer, errors made in
coding and processing the data.  Quality control and editing
procedures were used to minimize the number of errors made by
the respondents and the interviewers.

Since field representatives conducting the interviews usually
reside in the area in which they interview, the race and
ethnicity of the field representatives generally matches that
of the local population. Special efforts are made to further
match field representatives and the people they interview in
areas where English is not commonly spoken. About 90% of all
NCVS field representatives are female.

Standard errors measure only those nonsampling errors arising
from transient factors affecting individual responses
completely at random (simple response variance); they do not
reveal any systematic biases in the data. As calculated in
the NCVS, the standard errors would partially measure
nonsampling error arising from some of the above sources,
such as transient memory errors, or accidental errors in
recording or coding answers, for example.

Computation and Application of Standard Errors

Deriving standard errors which are applicable to a wide
variety of items and which can be prepared at a moderate cost
requires a number of approximations. Therefore, three
generalized variance function (gvf) constant parameters
(identified as "a,@ "b," and "c")were developed for use in
calculating standard errors. The parameters provide an
indication of the order of magnitude of the standard errors
rather than the precise standard error for any specific item. 
For each year, there are four sets of parameters for use with
a different sets of estimates, as described below. (Also see
spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mpar.
csv,for values).
 
Year-to-Year Correlation Between Estimates

Because of the year-to-year overlap in the sample, the same
households and persons contribute to annual estimates for
different years. This year-to-year correlation between
estimates is measured by rho. In general:

rho  0 when estimates are for the same year

rho  0 for year-to-year comparisons

     When comparing estimates that are 1or 2 years apart, use
rho as shown below.          
                        
     When comparing estimates that are more than 2 years
apart, assume rho=0.

Following are NCVS year-to-year correlation values for major
crime categories.

If estimates are uncorrelated, rho = 0.  Hence, omitting the
term containing rho in the formula will provide an accurate
standard error for the difference between uncorrelated
estimates.  On the other hand, if the two estimates have a
strong positive correlation, omitting the last term will
cause overestimation of the true standard error.  (Also see
spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06myy.
csv, for values).

Parameter set #1 is used for the overall person crime
estimates. These are the person crime estimates by crime
category for the whole population, not disaggregated by any
victim, offender, or incident characteristics, nor any 
variable related to reporting to police.

Parameter set #2 is used for the person crime domain
estimates. These are the person crime estimates disaggregated
by victim, offender, or incident characteristics, or any
variable related to reporting to police.

Parameter set #3 is used for the property crime estimates for
the whole population. These are the property crime estimates
by crime category for the whole population, not disaggregated
by any household characteristics, nor any variable related to
reporting to police.

Parameter set #4 is used for the property crime domain
estimates. These are the property crime estimates
disaggregated by household characteristics, or any variable
related to reporting to police.

For the statistic from Table 1 that corresponds to the crime
category "all crimes" (i.e., person and property crimes
together), parameter set #3 should be used. When the person
and property estimates are combined (i.e., all crimes) and
disaggregated by victim, household, incident characteristics,
as well as any variable related to reporting to police,
parameter set #4 should be used for the best estimate of the
corresponding variance.  

Direct variances were calculated using the balanced repeated
replication (BRR) method. The estimates and their
corresponding variances were fit to the standard 3 parameter
model to obtain the value of the parameters.

The following examples explain the procedures based upon the
2006 data. The formulas used to calculate the variances are
available in accompanying spreadsheets, Sigma 1 (See
spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06msig1.
csv, for values) and Sigma 2 (See spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06msig2.c
sv, for values).  For each example, a spreadsheet using the
formulas is also provided. 

Example 1.  See spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mex1.
csv, for values. This example shows how to calculate a
confidence interval around the count of  a personal crime,
the number of completed robberies in 2006. It uses parameter 
set #1 because the crime is not disaggregated by any
characteristics such as age  or race. The Sigma 1 spreadsheet
was used to calculate confidence intervals around  the
counts. 

The example from Table 1 in 2006 shows 482,290 completed
robberies. The confidence intervals were calculated by
entering the appropriate data into the Sigma 1 spreadsheet. 
Using the parameters for overall person crime estimates 
(Parameter set #1), the following values were entered:

"a" parameter = -0.00010690
"b" parameter = 4,561
"c" parameter = 1.391
 
The population base of 482,290 completed robberies was also
entered.  

The results show that the 95% confidence interval around the
estimated number of robbery victimizations is about equal to
482,290 plus or minus twice (1.96) the standard error, or
plus or minus 100,721: a confidence interval of 381,569 to
583,011.

Example 2.  See spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mex2.
csv, for values.  This example shows how to calculate a
confidence interval around a rate for a personal crime by a
particular variable, the rate of robberies for persons age 20
through 24 in 2006. It uses parameter 

set #2 because the crime is disaggregated by the
characteristic of age. The Sigma 2 spreadsheet was used to
calculate confidence intervals around the rates.

The example from Table 3 in 2006 shows a robbery rate of 7.3
per 1,000 persons age 20 through 24. The confidence intervals
were calculated by entering the appropriate data into the
Sigma 2 spreadsheet. Using the parameters for person domain
estimates (Parameter set #2), the following values were
entered:

"b" parameter = 4,160
"c" parameter = 2.719

The population base of 20,371,380 age 20 through 24 and the
rate of 7.3 for robberies per 1,000 persons age 20 through 24
were also entered.  

The results show that the 95% confidence interval around the
estimated rate of robbery victimizations for persons age 20
through 24 is equal to 7.3 plus or minus twice (1.96) the
standard error, or plus or minor 2.6: a confidence interval
of 4.7 to 9.9 per 1,000 persons age 20 through 24.  

Example 3.  See spreadsheet at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/sheets/cvus/2006/cv06mex3.
csv, for values. This example shows how to determine if the
differences between two rates or percentages are
statistically significant. This example compares the rates
for males and females for aggravated assault. It uses
parameter set #2 because the crime is disaggregated  by the
characteristic of gender. The Sigma 2 spreadsheet was used to
determine if the differences in rates were statistically
significant.

The example from Table 2 in 2006 shows an aggravated assault
rate of 6.3 per 1,000 males (age 12 or older) and 4.6 per
1,000 females (age 12 or older). Using the parameters for
person domain estimates (Parameter set #2), the following
values were entered:

"b" parameter = 4,160
"c" parameter = 2.719

For males (the first line for set #1), the population base of
120,465,800 males and the rate of 6.3 aggravated assaults per
1,000 males were entered.  For females (the second line for
set #2), the population base of 126,767,280 females and the
rate of 4.6 aggravated assaults per 1,000 females were also
entered.  

The results show that by comparing set #1 with set #2, the
differences between males and females for aggravated assault
in 2006 is statistically significant.  

The spreadsheet shows the ratio of a difference to the
standard error or the "z" score, which is associated with a
given statistical level of significance. A ratio  with an
absolute value of 1.96 or greater indicates that the
difference is significant  at the 95% confidence level (or
greater); a ratio with a absolute value between 1.65 and 1.96
indicates the difference is significant at a confidence level
between 90% and  95%; a ratio with an absolute value less
than 1.65 denotes a confidence level less than 90%. As
indicated on the spreadsheet, the ratio of the difference
(.0017) to the standard  error (.00074) is 2.3. Thus, the
spreadsheet indicates that the differences between  the rates
for aggravated assault for males and females was
statistically significant  at greater than the 95% confidence
level.  

In BJS reports, findings are normally significant at the 95%
confidence level. If the finding is significant at the 90%
confidence level, words such as "some evidence" are used. 
The standards used are explained in the methodology section
of each report.  

Criminal Victimization Glossary
 
Age - The appropriate age category is determined by the
respondent's age on the last day of the month before the
interview. 

Annual household income - The total income of the household
head and all members of the household for the 12 months
preceding the interview. Includes wages, salaries, net income
from businesses or farms, pensions, interest, dividends,
rent, and any other form of monetary income. 

Aggravated assault - Attack or attempted attack with a
weapon, regardless of whether or not an injury occurred and
attack without a weapon when serious injury results. 

With injury - An attack without a weapon when serious injury
results or an attack with a weapon involving any injury.
Serious injury includes broken bones, lost teeth, internal
injuries, loss of consciousness, and any unspecified injury
requiring two or more days of hospitalization. 

Threatened with a weapon - Threat or attempted attack by an
offender armed with a gun, knife, or other object used as a
weapon, not resulting in victim injury.
 
Assault - An unlawful physical attack or threat of attack.
Assaults may be classified  as aggravated or simple. Rape,
attempted rape, and sexual assaults are excluded from this
category, as well as robbery and attempted robbery. The
severity of assaults ranges from minor threat to incidents
which are nearly fatal. 

Burglary (also Household burglary) - Unlawful or forcible
entry or attempted entry of a residence. This crime usually,
but not always, involves theft. The illegal entry may be by
force, such as breaking a window or slashing a screen, or may
be without force by entering through an unlocked door or an
open window. As long as the person entering has no legal
right to be present in the structure a burglary has occurred.
Furthermore, the structure need not be the house itself for a
burglary to take place; illegal entry of a garage, shed, or
any other structure on the premises also constitutes
household burglary. If breaking and entering occurs in a
hotel or vacation residence, it is still classified as a
burglary for the household whose member or members were
staying there at the time the entry occurred. 

Completed burglary - A form of burglary in which a person who
has no legal right to be present in the structure
successfully gains entry to a residence, by use of force, or
without force.
  
Forcible entry - A form of completed burglary in which force
is used to gain entry to a residence. Some examples include
breaking a window or slashing a screen.
 
Unlawful entry without force - A form of completed burglary
committed by someone having no legal right to be on the
premises, even though no force is used. 

Attempted forcible entry - A form of burglary in which force
is used in an attempt to gain entry.
 
Collection year - The set of victimizations reported to NCVS
in interviews conducted during the same calendar year. This
set may include victimizations which occurred in the previous
calendar year, due to the retrospective nature of the NCVS
interview. Collection year data are used in tables beginning
in 1996.  See "Data year."

Commercial crimes - Crimes against commercial establishments
of any type are not included in the survey. Commercial
establishments include stores, restaurants, businesses,
service stations, medical offices or hospitals, or other
similar establishments. For victimizations occurring in
commercial establishments, the crime is included or not
included depending upon whether the survey respondent was
threatened or harmed in some way or personal property was
taken.
 
Crime classification - Victimizations and incidents are
classified based upon detailed characteristics of the event
provided by the respondent. Neither victims nor interviewers
classify crimes at the time of interview. During data
processing, a computer program classifies each event into one
type of crime, based upon the entries on a number of items on
the survey questionnaire. This ensures that similar events
will be classified using a standard procedure. The glossary
definition for each crime indicates the major characteristics
required to be so classified. If an event can be classified
as more than one type of crime, a hierarchy is used which 
classifies the crime according to the most serious event that
occurred. The hierarchy is: rape, sexual assault, robbery,
assault, burglary, motor vehicle theft, theft.
 
Data year - The set of victimizations reported to NCVS all of
which occurred within the same calendar year.  For all years
prior to 1996, Criminal Victimization in the United States
tables are based upon data year.  Beginning in 1996 and later
years, tables are based upon collection year.  See
"Collection Year."

Ethnicity - A classification based on Hispanic culture and
origin, regardless of race. Persons are asked directly if
they are Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino before being asked
about their racial category.

Head of household - A classification which defines one and
only one person in each housing unit as the head. Head of
household implies that the person rents or owns (or is in the
process of buying), the housing unit. The head of household
must be at least 18, unless all members of the household are
under 18, or the head is married to someone 18 or older. 

Hispanic - A person who describes himself as Mexican
American, Chicano, Mexican, Mexicano, Puerto Rican, Cuban,
Central American, South American, or from some other Spanish
culture or origin, regardless of race. 

Household - A person or group of people meeting either of the
following criteria: (1) people whose usual place of residence
is the same housing unit, even if they are temporarily
absent: (2) people staying in a housing unit who have no
usual place of residence elsewhere. 

Household Burglary - See burglary.

Incident - A specific criminal act involving one or more
victims and offenders. For example, if two people are robbed
at the same time and place, this is classified as two robbery
victimizations but only one robbery incident. 

Marital status - Every person is assigned to one of the
following classifications: (1) married, which includes
persons in common law unions and those who are currently
living apart for reasons other than marital discord
(employment, military service, etc.); (2) separated or
divorced, which includes married persons who are legally
separated and those who are not living together because of
marital discord; (3) widowed; and  (4) never married, which
includes persons whose marriages have been annulled and those
who are living together and not in a common law union.
 
Metropolitan area - See "Metropolitan Statistical Area." 

Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) - The Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) defines this as a population
nucleus of 50,000 or more, generally consisting of a city and
its immediate suburbs, along with adjacent communities having
a high degree of economic and social integration with the
nucleus. MSA's are designated by counties, the smallest
geographic units for which a wide range of statistical data
can be attained.    However, in New England, MSA's are
designated by cities and towns since these subcounty units
are of great local significance and considerable data is
available for them. Currently, an area is defined as an MSA
if it meets one of two standards: 
 
(1)A city has a population of at least 50,000; (2) the Census
Bureau defines an urbanized area of at least 50,000 people
with a total metropolitan population of at least 100,000 (or
75,000 in New England). The Census Bureau's definition of 
urbanized areas, data on commuting to work, and the strength
of the economic and social ties between the surrounding
counties and the central city determine which counties not
containing a main city are included in an MSA. For New
England, MSA's are determined by a core area and related
cities and towns, not counties. A metropolitan statistical
area may contain more than one city of 50,000 and may cross
State lines. 

Motor vehicle - An automobile, truck, motorcycle, or any
other motorized vehicle legally allowed on public roads and
highways.
 
Motor vehicle theft - Stealing or unauthorized taking of a
motor vehicle, including attempted thefts.
 
Completed motor vehicle theft - The successful taking of a
vehicle by an unauthorized person.

Attempted motor vehicle theft - The unsuccessful attempt by
an unauthorized person  to take a vehicle.
 
Multiple offenders - Two or more persons inflicting some
direct harm to a victim. The victim offender relationship is
determined by the offender with the closest relationship to
the victim. The following list ranks the different
relationships from closest to most distant: spouse, ex
spouse, parent, child, other relative, nonrelative well known
person, casual acquaintance, or stranger (See Nonstranger and
Stranger). 

Non Hispanic - Persons who report their culture or origin as
something other than "Hispanic" as defined above. This
distinction is made regardless of race. 

Nonstranger - A classification of a crime victim's
relationship to the offender. An offender who is either
related to, well known to, or casually acquainted with the
victim is a nonstranger. For crimes with more than one
offender, if any of the offenders are nonstrangers, then the
group of offenders as a whole is classified as nonstranger.
This category only applies to crimes which involve contact
between the victim and the offender; the distinction is not
made for crimes of theft since victims of this offense rarely
see the offenders. 

Offender - The perpetrator of a crime; this term usually
applies to crimes involving contact between the victim and
the offender. 

Offense - A crime. When referring to personal crimes, the
term can be used to refer to both victimizations and
incidents.
 
Personal crimes - Rape, sexual assault, personal robbery,
assault, purse snatching and pocket picking. This category
includes both attempted and completed crimes.  

Place of occurrence of crime - The location at which a crime
occurred, as specified by the victim. Survey measures of
crimes occurring in commercial establishments, restaurants,
nightclubs, public transportation and other similar places
include only those crimes involving NCVS measured crimes
against persons, not the establishments. Crimes against
commercial establishments and other places are not measured
by the survey.
 
Property crimes - Property crimes including burglary, motor
vehicle theft, or theft. This category includes both
attempted and completed crimes.
 
Purse snatching/Pocket picking - Theft or attempted theft of
property or cash directly from the victim by stealth, without
force or threat of force. 

Race - For this survey respondents self identify with one or
more racial categories. Racial categories for this report are
white only, black only, and other race only. The "other"
category is composed of Asian Pacific Islanders, and American
Indians, Aleuts, and Eskimos, if only one of these races is
given. Persons reporting two or more races are included in
the category of " more than one race". The race of the head
of household is use for computing household crime
demographics. 

Rape - Forced sexual intercourse including both psychological
coercion as well as physical force. Forced sexual intercourse
means vaginal, anal or oral penetration by the offender(s).
This category also includes incidents where the penetration
is from a foreign object such as a bottle. Includes attempted
rapes, male as well as female victims and both heterosexual
and homosexual rape. Attempted rape includes verbal threats
of rape. 

Rate of victimization - see "Victimization rate." 

Region - The States have been divided into four groups or
census regions: 

Midwest - Includes the 12 States of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North
Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. 

Northeast - Includes the 9 states of Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont. 

South - Includes the District of Columbia and the 16 States
of Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma,
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West
Virginia. 

West - Includes the 13 states of Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon,
Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
 
Robbery - Completed or attempted theft, directly from a
person, of property or cash by force or threat of force, with
or without a weapon, and with or without injury.
  
Completed/property taken - The successful taking of property
from a person by force or threat of force, with or without a
weapon, and with or without injury. 

Completed with injury - The successful taking of property
from a person, accompanied by an attack, either with or
without a weapon, resulting in injury. 

Completed without injury - The successful taking of property
from a person by force or the threat of force, either with or
without a weapon, but not resulting in injury.
 
Attempted to take property - The attempt to take property
from a person by force or threat of force without success,
with or without a weapon, and with or without injury. 

Attempted without injury - The attempt to take property from
a person by force or the threat of force without success,
either with or without a weapon, but not resulting in
injury.
 
Attempted with injury - The attempt to take property from a
person without success, accompanied by an attack, either with
or without a weapon, resulting in injury. 

Rural area - A place not located inside the Metropolitan
Statistical Area. This category includes a variety of
localities, ranging from sparsely populated rural areas to
cities with populations less than 50,000. 

Sample - The set of housing units selected by the U. S.
Census Bureau to be interviewed for the survey. All occupants
of the household age 12 or older are interviewed. See
methodology for sample inclusions and exclusions. 

Series - Six or more similar but separate events, which the
respondent is unable to describe separately in detail to an
interviewer.

Sexual assault - A wide range of victimizations, separate
from rape or attempted rape. These crimes include attacks or
attempted attacks generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between victim and offender. Sexual assaults may or may not
involve force and include such things as grabbing or
fondling. Sexual assault also includes verbal threats. 

Simple assault - Attack without a weapon resulting either in
no injury, minor injury (for example, bruises, black eyes,
cuts, scratches or swelling) or in undetermined injury
requiring less than 2 days of hospitalization. Also includes
attempted assault without a weapon. 

With minor injury - An attack without a weapon resulting in
such injuries as bruises, black eyes, cuts or in undetermined
injury requiring less than 2 days of hospitalization. 

Without injury - An attempted assault without a weapon not
resulting in injury.
 
Stranger - A classification of the victim's relationship to
the offender for crimes involving direct contact between the
two. Incidents are classified as involving strangers if the
victim identifies the offender as a stranger, did not see or
recognize the offender, or knew the offender only by sight.
Crimes involving multiple offenders are classified as
involving nonstrangers if any of the offenders was a
nonstranger. Since victims of theft without contact rarely
see the offender, no distinction is made between strangers
and nonstrangers for this crime. 

Suburban areas - A county or counties containing a central
city, plus any contiguous counties that are linked socially
and economically to the central city. On data tables,
suburban areas are categorized as those portions of
metropolitan areas situated "outside central cities." 

Tenure - The NCVS recognizes two forms of household tenancy:
(1) owned, which includes dwellings that are mortgaged, and
(2) rented, which includes rent free quarters belonging to a
party other than the occupants, and situations where rental
payments are in kind or services. 

Theft - Completed or attempted theft of property or cash
without personal contact. Incidents involving theft of
property from within the sample household would classify as
theft if the offender has a legal right to be in the house
(such as a maid, delivery person, or guest). If the offender
has no legal right to be in the house, the incident would
classify as a burglary. 

Completed - To successfully take without permission property
or cash without personal contact between the victim and
offender.  

Attempted - To unsuccessfully attempt to take property or
cash without personal contact.
 
Urban areas - The largest city (or grouping of cities) in a
Metropolitan Statistical Area (see definition of Metropolitan
Statistical Area). 

Victim - The recipient of a criminal act, usually used in
relation to personal crimes, but also applicable to
households. 

Victimization - A crime as it affects one individual person
or household. For personal crimes, the number of
victimizations is equal to the number of victims involved.
The number of victimizations may be greater than the number
of incidents because more than one person may be victimized
during an incident. Each crime against a household is assumed
to involve a single victim, the affected household.
 
Victimization rate - A measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specified population group. 

For personal crimes, this is based on the number of
victimizations per 1,000 residents age 12 or older. For
household crimes, the victimization rates are calculated
using the number of incidents per 1,000 households. 

Victimize - To commit a crime against a person or household.

Violence, crimes of - Rape, sexual assault, personal robbery
or assault. This category includes both attempted and
completed crimes. It does not include purse snatching and
pocket picking. Murder is not measured by the NCVS because of
an inability to question the victim. 

Completed violence - The sum of all completed rapes, sexual
assaults, robberies, and assaults. See individual crime types
for definition of completed crimes. 

Attempted/threatened violence - The unsuccessful attempt of
rape, sexual assault, personal robbery or assault. Includes
attempted attacks or sexual assaults by means of verbal
threats. See individual crime types for definition of
attempted crimes. 



08/27/08 JER


