U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4883

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=72
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Statistical Tables
*******************

Hate Crime Victimization, 2004–2012 - Statistical Tables

Meagan Meuchel Wilson, Statistician

In 2012, an estimated 293,800 nonfatal violent and property 
hate crime victimizations occurred against persons age 12 or 
older residing in U.S. households.  The apparent increase 
from 2011 to 2012 in the rate of overall violent hate crime 
was not statistically significant (figure 1).

The findings from this report came primarily from the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), which has been collecting data on crimes 
motivated by hate since 2003. The NCVS and the FBI’s Uniform 
Crime Reports (UCR) Hate Crime Statistics Program, which are 
the principal sources of annual information on hate crime in 
the United States, use the definition of hate crime provided 
in the Hate Crime Statistics Act (28 U.S.C. § 534). The act 
defines hate crimes as “crimes that manifest evidence of 
prejudice based on race, gender or gender identity, religion, 
disability, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The NCVS 
measures crimes perceived by victims to be motivated by an 
offender’s bias against them for belonging to or being 
associated with a group largely identified by these 
characteristics.

Hate crime victimization refers to a single victim or 
household that experienced a criminal incident believed by 
the victim to be motivated by hate. For violent crimes (rape 
or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault) and for personal larceny, the count of hate crime 
victimizations is the number of individuals who experienced a 
violent hate crime. For crimes against households (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft), each household 
affected by a hate crime is counted as a single 
victimization.
This report presents NCVS data on the characteristics of hate 
crimes and hate crime victims from 2003 to 2012. Trend 
estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages centered on 
the most recent year. This method generally improves the 
reliability and stability of estimate comparisons over time. 
For ease of discussion, the report refers to all 2-year 
estimates by the most recent year. For example, estimates 
reported for 2012 represent the average estimates for 2011 
and 2012. The report also compares NCVS and UCR overall 
trends in hate crime victimization.

*******************************
List of figures
*******************************

Figure 1. Violent hate crime victimizations reported and not 
reported to police, 2004–2012

Figure 2. NCVS and UCR hate crime victimizations, 2004–2012

*******************************
List of tables
*******************************

Table 1. Hate crime victimizations, 2004–2012

Table 2. Victims’ perceptions of offender bias in hate 
crimes, 2004, 2011, and 2012

Table 3. Hate and nonhate crime victimizations, by type of 
crime, 2004, 2011, and 2012

Table 4. Presence of weapons and injuries sustained in 
violent hate and nonhate crime victimizations, 2004–2012

Table 5. Hate crime victimizations reported to police, 2004, 
2011, and 2012

Table 6. Characteristics of violent hate crime victims, 2004, 
2011, and 2012

Table 7. Characteristics of violent hate crime offenders as 
reported by victims, 2004, 2011, and 2012

Table 8. Hate crime victimizations recorded by the NCVS and 
UCR, 2004–2012

*******************************
List of appendix tables
*******************************

Appendix Table 1. Estimates and standard errors for figure 1: 
Violent hate crime victimizations reported and not reported 
to police, 2004–2012

Appendix Table 2. Population and total criminal victimization 
counts, 2004–2012

Appendix Table 3. Standard errors for table 1: Hate crime 
victimizations, 2004–2012

Appendix Table 4. Standard errors for table 2: Victims’ 
perceptions of offender bias in hate crimes, 2004, 2011, and 
2012

Appendix Table 5. Standard errors for table 3: Hate and 
nonhate crime victimizations, by type of crime, 2004, 2011, 
and 2012

Appendix Table 6. Standard errors for table 4: Presence of 
weapons and injuries sustained in violent hate and nonhate 
crime victimizations, 2004–2012

Appendix Table 7. Standard errors for table 5: Hate crime 
victimizations reported to police, 2004, 2011, 
and 2012

Appendix Table 8. Standard errors for table 6: 
Characteristics of violent hate crime victims, 2004, 2011, 
and 2012

Appendix Table 8. Standard errors for table 7: 
Characteristics of violent hate crime offenders as reported 
by victims, 2004, 2011, and 2012

Appendix Table 10. Standard errors for table 8: Hate crime 
victimizations recorded by the NCVS and UCR, 2004–2012

*******************************
Number and rate of hate crimes
*******************************

* In 2012, hate crimes accounted for 1.2% of all 
victimizations and 4.2% of violent victimizations (table 1).

* No statistically significant change was observed in either 
the number of total hate crimes or violent hate crimes that 
occurred from 2004 to 2012.

* After a decline from 2004 to 2005, the property hate crime 
victimization rate remained stable from 2005 to 2012.

**********************
Hate crime motivation
**********************

* Approximately 58% of hate crime victims reported more than 
one type of motivation in 2012 (not shown in table).

* In 2012, victims perceived that the offender was motivated 
by bias against the victim’s ethnicity in 51% of hate crimes 
(table 2). This was a statistically significant increase from 
30% of hate crimes motivated by ethnicity bias in 2011 and 
22% in 2004. 
* The percentage of hate crimes motivated by religious bias 
was nearly three times higher in 2012 (28%) than in 2004 
(10%), but did not have a statistically significant change 
from 2011 to 2012.

* In 2009, Congress passed new legislation amending the Hate 
Crime Statistics Act to include hate crimes with evidence of 
bias against a particular gender or gender identity. BJS has 
been collecting information on hate crimes motivated by 
gender bias since 2003. The percentage of hate crimes 
motivated by gender bias was more than two times higher in 
2011 (25%) and 2012 (26%) than in 2004 (12%). 

******************************************** 
Differences between hate and nonhate crimes
********************************************

* Each year from 2004 to 2012, violent crimes accounted for a 
higher percentage of hate crimes than nonhate crimes (table 
3).

* The percentage of hate crimes involving violence increased 
from 78% in 2004 to 90% in both 2011 and 2012. However, no 
statistically significant difference was observed in the 
percentage of hate crimes involving serious violence or 
simple assault in these years.

* In 2012, serious violent crime accounted for a higher 
percentage of all hate crime victimizations (27%) than 
nonhate crime victimizations (8%).

* In 2012, no statistically significant difference was 
observed between the percentage of violent hate crimes (30%) 
and violent nonhate crimes (31%) that involved serious 
violence (not shown in table).

**********************
Weapons and injuries
**********************

* In 2012, the offender had a weapon in at least 24% of 
violent hate crime victimizations (table 4). 

* No statistically significant difference was reported 
between the percentage of violent hate (24%) and violent 
nonhate (20%) crime victimizations in which the offender was 
known to have a weapon in 2012.

* The percentage of violent hate and violent nonhate crime 
victimizations in which the offender was known to have a 
weapon remained stable from 2011 to 2012. 

* In 2012, the victim sustained an injury in about 20% of 
violent hate crime victimizations.
 
* No statistically significant difference was observed in 
2012 between the percentage of violent hate (20%) and violent 
nonhate (24%) crime victimizations in which the victim 
sustained an injury.

* The percentage of violent hate and violent nonhate crime 
victimizations in which the victim sustained an injury 
remained stable from 2011 to 2012. 

***********************************
Hate crimes reported to the police
***********************************

* An estimated 60% of total and violent hate crime 
victimizations were not reported to police in 2012 (table 5). 
This was a slight decline from 2011, when about three-
quarters of total (74%) and violent (73%) hate crime 
victimizations were not reported to police.

* Overall, the percentage of hate crime victimizations that 
resulted in the victim signing a complaint or the police 
making an arrest did not have a statistically significant 
change from 2011 to 2012.

*********************************
Violent hate crime victim 
and offender characteristics
*********************************

* From 2011 to 2012, rates of violent hate crime 
victimization did not have a statistically significant change 
for either males or females (table 6).

* In 2011, violent hate crime victimization rates were 
similar among white non-Hispanics, black non-Hispanics, and 
Hispanics. However, in 2012, Hispanics experienced a higher 
rate of violent hate crime victimization (2.0 victimizations 
per 1,000 residents) than whites (0.8 per 1,000) and a 
slightly higher rate than blacks (1.1 per 1,000). 

* The rate of violent hate crime victimization against 
Hispanics more than tripled from 0.6 per 1,000 persons age 12 
or older in 2011 to 2.0 per 1,000 in 2012.

* The rate of violent hate crime victimization increased for 
persons ages 18 to 24 (from 0.6 per 1,000 in 2011 to 2.0 in 
2012) and for persons ages 50 to 64 (from 0.4 to 0.9 per 
1,000), while the rate declined for persons ages 25 to 34 
(from 1.6 to 0.7 per 1,000). Violent hate crime victimization 
rates for persons in all other age groups did not have a 
statistically significant change from 2011 to 2012.

* Persons residing in households with an income greater than 
$50,000 per year experienced a higher rate of violent hate 
crime victimization in 2012 (1.0 per 1,000) than in 2011 (0.4 
per 1,000).

* In both 2011 and 2012, persons living in households with an 
income of $24,999 or less per year experienced the highest 
rate of violent hate crime victimization (2.1 per 1,000), 
compared to persons residing in all other households (1.0 or 
less per 1,0001).

* From 2011 to 2012, no statistically significant change was 
observed in the percentage of violent hate crimes committed 
by either a single offender or by multiple offenders (table 
7). 

* In 2012, the percentage of violent hate crimes committed by 
a single offender (64%) was higher than the percentage 
committed by two or more offenders (34%). 

* Each year from 2004 to 2012, victims reported that males 
committed the majority of violent hate crimes.

* The percentage of violent hate crime victims who perceived 
the offender to be white decreased from 58% in 2011 to 34% in 
2012. However, the percentage of white offenders was similar 
in 2004 and 2012.

* The percentage of offenders ages 18 to 29 declined from 29% 
in 2011 to 13% in 2012. In 2012, persons age 30 and over made 
up the largest percentage of hate crime offenders (41%).

* In 2012, the percentage of violent hate crimes committed by 
someone known to the victim was slightly higher (53%) than 
the percentage committed by a stranger (40%).

*****************************************
Hate crimes recorded by the NCVS and UCR
*****************************************

* The FBI’s UCR collects data on hate crimes known to the 
police. It includes offenses excluded from the NCVS, such as 
murder or nonnegligent manslaughter, intimidation, arson, 
vandalism, and crimes against institutions (e.g., churches, 
synagogues, and businesses). The NCVS collects data on hate 
crimes both reported and not reported to police and allows 
the victim to define whether a hate crime occurred.

* Hate crime victimizations recorded by the UCR declined 
steadily from 2008 to 2012 (table 8). However, no 
statistically significant change was observed in NCVS hate 
crime victimizations reported to police from 2008 to 2012. 

* UCR hate crime victimizations were lower in 2012 than in 
2004.  No statistically significant difference was observed 
between the number of NCVS hate crime victimizations reported 
to police in 2004 (127,390) and 2012 (98,460).

* Based on data from the NCVS, persons age 12 or older 
experienced an annual average of 269,140 hate crime 
victimizations from 2004 to 2012, of which 105,890 were 
reported to police (figure 2). 

* According to the NCVS, an annual average of 14,380 hate 
crime victimizations were confirmed by police investigators 
from 2004 to 2012. This estimate was not statistically 
different from the FBI’s UCR annual average number of hate 
crime victims (8,770) during the same period.

*************
Methodology
************

Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and 
other theft) both reported and not reported to police. In 
addition to providing annual level and change estimates on 
criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of 
information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves 
(e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, 
education level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. Information is collected for each 
victimization incident about the offender (e.g., age, race 
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and experiences 
with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months 
either in-person or over the phone, for a total of seven 
interviews. 

Generally, all first interviews are conducted in-person. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in the sample for 
the 3-year period. The sample includes persons living in 
group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings, and excludes persons living in 
military barracks and institutional settings, such as 
correctional or hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For 
more information, see the Survey Methodology for Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS 
web, May 2011.)

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
**************************************

In 2012, 92,390 households and 162,940 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 87% 
for households and 87% for eligible persons. Victimizations 
that occurred outside of the United States were excluded from 
this report. In 2012, less than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States and were 
excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use data from the 2003 to 2012 NCVS 
data files, weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a 
census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to 
inflate sample point estimates to known population totals and 
to compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the 
sample design.

The NCVS data files include both household and person 
weights. The household weight is commonly used to calculate 
estimates of property crimes, such as motor vehicle theft or 
burglary, which are identified within the household. Person 
weights provide an estimate of the population represented by 
each person in the sample. After proper adjustment, both 
household and person weights are also typically used to form 
the denominator in calculations of crime rates.

The victimization weights used in this analysis account for 
the number of persons present during an incident and for 
high-frequency repeat victimizations (or series 
victimizations). Series victimizations are similar in type 
but occur with such frequency that a victim is unable to 
recall each individual event or describe each event in 
detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify 
and classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and to collect detailed information on only 
the most recent incident in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of ten 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in rather large increases in the level of violent 
victimization. However, trends in violence are generally 
similar regardless of whether series victimizations are 
included.

In 2012, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. 
Weighting series incidents as the number of incidents up to a 
maximum of ten produces more reliable estimates of crime 
levels, while the cap at ten minimizes the effect of extreme 
outliers on the rates. Additional information on the series 
enumeration is detailed in the report Methods for Counting 
High Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime 
Victimization Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012. 
Due to slight revisions in the public use file weights, 2011 
victimization estimates may vary slightly from previous 
publications. These differences were determined to be 
statistically insignificant changes.

Standard error computations
****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with 
the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate 
to another estimate or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates 
based on a sample have some degree of sampling error. The 
sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses and the 
size of the sample. When the sampling error around an 
estimate is taken into account, the estimates that appear 
different may not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (e.g., 
counts, percentages, and rates) in this report. 

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, BJS tested the significance of all comparisons 
in the text. The Student’s t-statistic was the primary test 
procedure, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level.  Differences described as slight or 
slightly passed a test at the 0.10 level of statistical 
significance (90% confidence level). Caution is required when 
comparing estimates not explicitly discussed in this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

* According to the NCVS, in 2012, the violent hate crime 
victimization rate among persons age 12 or older was 1.0 per 
1,000 persons (see table 1). Using the GVFs, BJS determined 
that the estimate has a standard error of 0.1 (see appendix 
table 3). A confidence interval around the estimate was 
generated by multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-
score of a normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% 
at either end of the distribution). Therefore, the 95% 
confidence interval around the 1.0 estimate from 2012 is 1.0 
± (0.1 X 1.96) or (0.8 to 1.2). In other words, if different 
samples using the same procedures were taken from the U.S. 
population in 2012, 95% of the time the violent hate crime 
victimization rate would fall between 0.8 and 1.2 per 1,000 
persons.

In this report, a coefficient of variation (CV) for all 
estimates, representing the ratio of the standard error to 
the estimate, was also calculated for all estimates. CVs 
provide a measure of reliability and a means to compare the 
precision of estimates across measures with differing levels 
or metrics. In cases where the CV was greater than 50%, or 
the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was 
noted with a “!” symbol (Interpret data with caution; 
estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the 
coefficient of variation is greater than 50%).

Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) 
****************************

The UCR Hate Crime Statistics Program captures information 
about the types of bias that motivate hate crimes, the nature 
of the offenses, and some information about the victims and 
offenders by attaching the collection of hate crime 
statistics to the established UCR data collection procedures. 
The hate crime data presented here comprise a subset of 
information that law enforcement agencies submit to the UCR 
program.

Crimes reported to the FBI involve those motivated by biases 
based on race, religion, sexual orientation, ethnicity/ 
national origin, and disability. Forthcoming data collection 
changes will allow the reporting of crimes motivated by 
gender and gender identity bias, as well as crimes committed 
by and directed against juveniles. The victim of a hate crime 
may be an individual, business, institution, or society as a 
whole. In UCR data, law enforcement specifies the number of 
offenders and, when possible, the race of the offender or 
offenders as a group. Agencies that participated in the Hate 
Crime Statistics Program in 2012 represented nearly 249 
million residents, or 79.3% percent of the nation’s 
population, covering 48 states and the District of Columbia. 

Hate crime legislation 
***********************

On April 23, 1990, Congress passed the Hate Crime Statistics 
Act, which requires the Attorney General to collect data 
“about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based on 
race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The 
Attorney General delegated the responsibilities of developing 
the procedures for implementing, collecting, and managing 
hate crime data to the director of the FBI, who in turn 
assigned the tasks to the UCR program. Under the direction of 
the Attorney General and with the cooperation and assistance 
of many local and state law enforcement agencies, the UCR 
program created a hate crime data collection to comply with 
the congressional mandate.

In September 1994, lawmakers amended the Hate Crime 
Statistics Act to include bias against persons with 
disabilities in the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994. The FBI started gathering data for the 
additional bias type on January 1, 1997.

The Church Arson Prevention Act, which was signed into law in 
July 1996, removed the sunset clause from the original 
statute and mandated that the collection of hate crime data 
become a permanent part of the UCR program.

In 2009, Congress further amended the Hate Crime Statistics 
Act by passing the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate 
Crime Prevention Act. The amendment includes the collection 
of data for crimes motivated by bias against a particular 
gender and gender identity, as well as for crimes committed 
by, and crimes directed against, juveniles. The FBI is 
currently making plans to implement changes to collect these 
data.

The Hate Crime Statistics Act can be accessed at 
http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/hc2009/hatecrimestatistics.html.

****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

This report was written by Meagan Meuchel Wilson, on detail 
from the U.S. Census Bureau. Lynn Langton verified the 
report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

February 2014, NCJ 244409
*****************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
2/5/2014/JER/12:33pm
**********************


