U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4801

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=78
---------------------------------------------------------

****************
Special Report
****************

Intimate Partner Violence: Attributes of Victimization, 
1993–2011

Shannan Catalano, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

This report examines nonfatal intimate partner violence, 
including rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
assault, and simple assault committed by the victim’s 
current or former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend. It 
focuses on the attributes of intimate partner victimization 
as measured by the type of crime, type of attack, whether 
the victim was threatened before the attack, weapon use by 
the offender, victim injury, and medical treatment received 
for injuries. The report presents these characteristics as 
measures of the seriousness or severity of the incident. For 
example, victimizations involving a physical injury are 
considered more severe than those without a physical injury. 

The rate of serious intimate partner violence (rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault) against 
females declined by 72%, from 5.9 victimizations per 1,000 
females age 12 or older in 1994 to 1.6 per 1,000 in 2011 
(figure 1). The majority of the decline occurred from 1994 
to 2001, when the rate of serious intimate partner violence 
against females declined by 59%. The rate fluctuated between 
2 and 3 victimizations per 1,000 from 2001 to 2011. Similar 
to the rate of serious intimate partner violence, the rate 
of simple assault against females by an intimate partner 
declined by 70%, from 10.3 victimizations per 1,000 females 
in 1994 to 3.1 per 1,000 in 2011. (See definition of 
intimate partner violence and crime types in Methodology.)

***********************************************************
**********
Highlights
**********

* From 1994 to 2011, the rate of serious intimate partner 
violence declined 72% for females and 64% for males.

* Nonfatal serious violence comprised more than a third of 
intimate partner violence against females and males during 
the most recent 10-year period (2002-11).

* An estimated two-thirds of female and male intimate 
partner victimizations involved a physical attack in 2002-
11; the remaining third involved an attempted attack or 
verbal threat of harm.

* In 2002–11, 8% of female intimate partner victimizations 
involved some form of sexual violence during the incident.

* About 4% of females and 8% of males who were victimized by 
an intimate partner were shot at, stabbed, or hit with a 
weapon in 2002–11.

* In 2002–11, a larger percentage of male (27%) than female 
(18%) intimate partner victimizations involved a weapon. 

* In 2002–11, 5% of females and 19% of males were hit by an 
object their intimate partner held or threw at them.

* An estimated 50% of females victimized by an intimate 
partner, compared to 44% of males, suffered an injury in 
2002–11.

* In 2002–11, a greater percentage of female (13%) than male 
(5%) intimate partner victimizations resulted in a serious 
injury such as internal injury, unconsciousness, or broken 
bones.

* An average of 18% of females and 11% of males were 
medically treated for injuries sustained during intimate 
partner violent victimizations in 2002–11.
***********************************************************

One dimension of severity that is not explored here is the 
repeated nature of these victimizations. A victim who is 
repeatedly assaulted either by threats or direct physical 
attacks may be exposed to more severe intimate partner 
violence than someone who experiences a single 
victimization, all else being equal. Estimates presented in 
this report do not address the potentially increased 
severity of repeated intimate partner violence.

The report presents trend estimates based on 2-year rolling 
averages centered on the most recent year. For example, 
estimates reported for 1994 represent the average estimates 
for 1993 and 1994. For ease of discussion, the report refers 
to all 2-year estimates by the most recent year. This method 
generally improves the reliability and stability of estimate 
comparisons over time. However, estimates based on 2 years 
of data are still insufficient to present reliable and 
stable comparisons for some subgroups. For example, the 
number of males seriously injured by intimate partner 
violence during a 2-year period is not large enough to 
produce reliable estimates. For this reason the report 
focuses on 2-year trends for females only. Other tables in 
this report focus on a single 10-year aggregate period from 
2002 through 2011 for females and males. These approaches—
using rolling averages and aggregating years—increase the 
reliability and stability of estimates and facilitates 
comparisons of detailed victimization attributes.

To examine the attributes of intimate partner victimization, 
it is important to determine how measures of seriousness 
differ between intimate and nonintimate violence. To enable 
these comparisons, the aggregate tables also include 
estimates of nonintimate violent victimization. These 
comparisons are discussed in Comparing intimate and 
nonintimate violent victimization of females and males in 
this report.

The data in this report were drawn from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), which collects information on nonfatal 
victimizations reported and not reported to the police 
against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households.  For additional 
estimates not included in this report, see the NCVS 
Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the BJS website.

****************************************
From 1994 to 2011, the rate of serious 
intimate partner violence against 
males declined by 64%
****************************************

For males, the rate of serious intimate partner violence 
declined by 64%, from 1.1 victimizations per 1,000 in 1994  
to 0.4 per 1,000 in 2011. Similar to the pattern observed 
for females, the majority of this decline occurred from 1994 
to 2001. Rates of serious intimate partner violence against 
males declined by 71% from 1994 to 2001 and fluctuated 
between 0.4 and 1.0 victimizations per 1,000 through 2011. 

The rate of simple assault against males by an intimate 
partner decreased by 44% from 1994 to 2005, from 1.9 
victimizations per 1,000 males to 1.0 per 1,000, with no 
further change observed in the trend through 2010. The rate 
of simple assault against males by an intimate partner 
increased from 0.7 victimization per 1,000 males age 12 or 
older in 2010 to 1.1 victimizations per 1,000 in 2011.

****************************************
In 2002–11, nonfatal serious violence 
comprised more than a third of intimate 
partner violence experienced by females 
and males
****************************************

From 1994 to 2011, the percentage of serious intimate 
partner violence experienced by females fluctuated between 
28% to 42% (figure 2). On average during this period, 
serious intimate partner violence accounted for more than a 
third (34%) of intimate violence against females. Following 
a decline in the percentage of serious intimate partner 
violence against females between 1994 (36%) and 1996 (28%), 
no changes were observed through 2002 in the proportion of 
female intimate partner violence that was serious. After 
this period of stability, serious intimate violence 
increased briefly from 33% in 2002 to 42% in 2004. From 2005 
to 2011, the percentage of serious intimate partner violence 
against females fluctuated between 28% and 36%.

During the most recent 10-year period (2002–11), aggravated 
assault accounted for the largest percentage of serious 
intimate partner violence experienced by females (16%), 
while rape or sexual assault (10%) and robbery (9%) 
contributed a similar percentage (table 1).

Serious violent crime accounted for 39% of intimate partner 
violence committed against males. As for females, aggravated 
assault (22%) accounted for the largest percentage of 
serious intimate partner violence against males. However, 
16% of intimate violence against males was comprised of 
robbery, while rape or sexual assault accounted for the 
smallest percentage of intimate partner violence experienced 
by males (about 1%).
***********************************************************

****************************************
A larger percentage of female than male 
homicide victims were killed by an 
intimate partner when the offender 
relationship was known
****************************************

Although the majority of homicides recorded by the FBI’s 
Supplementary Homicide Report involved male victims, a 
larger percentage of females than males were murdered by an 
intimate partner when the offender relationship was known 
(table 2). Of the 3,032 homicide incidents involving females 
in 2010, 39% were committed by an intimate, 37% were 
committed by a nonintimate, and 24% by an unknown offender. 
During the same year, of the 10,878 homicide incidents 
involving males, 3% were committed by an intimate, 48% by a 
nonintimate, and 50% by an offender with an unknown 
relationship to the victim.

The classification of a homicide by victim-offender 
relationship is limited by what is known about the offender. 
Often the relationship between a victim and the offender is 
not known when an offender is not identified or apprehended 
during subsequent criminal investigations. From 1993 to 
2010, the relationship between the victim and offender was 
not known or missing in 24% to 32% of homicide incidents 
involving female victims and 40% to 51% of homicide 
incidents involving male victims. Homicide is an important 
factor when examining the attributes of intimate partner 
violence. However, caution should be exercised when 
describing victim-offender relationships and homicide due to 
the limitations of missing data.
***********************************************************

****************************************
In 2002–11, about 4% of females and 8% 
of males victimized by an intimate 
partner were shot at, stabbed, or hit 
with a weapon
****************************************

From 1994 to 2011, the percentage of female victimizations 
involving a physical attack by an intimate partner 
fluctuated between 60% and 72% (figure 3). The remainder of 
these victimizations involved an attempted attack or threat 
of harm by the offender (not shown in figure). The 
percentage of female intimate partner victimizations in 
which the offender threatened a victim before the attack 
fluctuated between 39% and 63%. 

The percentage of physical attacks and threats prior to the 
attack followed similar patterns of increase and decrease 
from 1994 to 1999. From 1999 to 2007, the percentage of 
physical attacks against female victims of intimate partner 
violence steadily increased from 62% to 72%, while threats 
prior to the attack against female victims of intimate 
partner violence fluctuated between 39% and 63%. From 2007 
to 2011, both physical attacks (down 16%) and threats of 
harm (down 30%) against female victims of intimate partner 
violence decreased.

During the most recent 10-year period (2002-11), about 8% of 
female intimate partner victimizations included some form of 
sexual violence (table 3). In 4% of intimate partner 
victimizations against females, the victim was shot at, 
stabbed, or hit with a weapon. In approximately 5% of 
intimate partner violence against females, the victim was 
hit by an object that her intimate partner held or threw at 
her. Physical attacks involving hitting, slapping, or 
knocking the victim down accounted for the largest 
percentage of intimate partner violence against females 
(45%). 

For male intimate partner violence, in 8% of the 
victimizations the victim was shot at, stabbed, or hit with 
a weapon, while in 19%, the victim was hit by an object that 
an intimate partner held or threw at him. The most common 
form of physical attack against male victims of intimate 
partner violence was being hit, slapped, or knocked down by 
the offender (43%). In approximately 31% of male intimate 
partner victimizations that involved a physical attack, the 
offender threatened the victim with harm prior to the 
attack.

****************************************
In 2002–11, about 18% of female and 27% 
of male intimate partner violence 
victimizations involved an offender 
with a weapon
****************************************

From 1994 to 2011, the percentage of weapon-related intimate 
partner violence against females fluctuated between 13% and 
25% (figure 4). The highest percentages were observed in 
2003 and 2004, when approximately a quarter of females 
victimized by an intimate faced an offender armed with a 
weapon. In 2011, 18% of female intimate partner 
victimizations involved an offender with a weapon, similar 
to the percentage observed in 1994.

In 2002–11, about 5% of female intimate partner 
victimizations involved a firearm, 6% involved a knife, and 
7% involved some other type of weapon (e.g., broken bottle, 
cookware, or another household object) (table 4). In 
contrast to females, a weapon was present in a larger 
percentage (27%) of male intimate partner victimizations. 
When analyzed by weapon type, intimate partner 
victimizations against males involving an offender with a 
knife (11%) accounted for a slightly smaller percentage of 
violence than those with other types of weapons (15%).
 
****************************************
In 2002–11, a larger percentage of female
(13%) than male (5%) intimate partner 
victimizations resulted in serious physical 
injury
****************************************

From 1994 to 2011, the percentage of female intimate partner 
victimizations resulting in physical injury fluctuated 
between 42% and 59% (figure 5). Physical injuries suffered 
by female victims of intimate partner violence decreased 
from 56% in 1994 to 45% in 1996. From 1999 to 2006, the 
percentage of females physically injured during intimate 
partner victimization increased from 47% to a high of 59%. 
This period of increase was followed by a decrease, and in 
2011, about 42% of females victimized by an intimate were 
physically injured during the incident.

In 2002–11, 13% of female intimate partner victimizations 
resulted in serious physical injury (table 5). Internal 
injuries, unconsciousness, and broken bones accounted for 
about 5%; gunshot and knife wounds accounted for 1%; and 
sexual violence accounted for 7%. Bruises, cuts, and other 
injuries accounted for 46% of female intimate partner 
violence. 

During the same period, 44% of male intimate partner 
victimizations resulted in a physical injury. About 5% of 
the victimizations resulted in serious physical injury. 
Gunshot and knife wounds accounted for 2% of serious injury 
against males. Bruises, cuts, and other injuries accounted 
for 41% of male intimate partner violence.

****************************************
In 2002–11, a larger percentage of 
female (18%) than male (11%) victims were 
treated for injuries sustained during 
intimate partner violence
****************************************

After a brief decrease between 1994 and 1996, the percentage 
of female intimate partner victimizations in which the 
victim sought medical treatment was relatively stable from 
1997 to 2001, fluctuating from 18% to 21% (figure 6). In 
2003, about 27% of females victimized by an intimate partner 
received treatment for injuries. The percentage decreased to 
13% from 2003 to 2009 and then increased to 18% in 2011. 

In 2002–11, an estimated 18% of females victimized by an 
intimate partner received medical treatment. A similar 
percentage of females victimized by an intimate partner were 
treated at the scene, the victim’s home, or the home of a 
neighbor or friend (8%) or in a formal hospital setting (8%) 
(table 6). Another 2% of females victimized by an intimate 
partner received treatment at a medical office, local 
clinic, or health unit.
 
Compared to females, a smaller percentage (11%) of males 
victimized by an intimate partner received medical 
treatment. Of male intimate partner victimizations, 6% 
received treatment at the scene, the victim’s home, or the 
home of a neighbor or friend, and 4% were treated in a 
hospital setting.
***********************************************************

****************************************
Comparing intimate and nonintimate 
violent victimization of females 
and males
****************************************

* This section presents aggregated estimates from 2002-11 
and compares intimate and nonintimate victimization by sex. 
Serious violence against females accounted for a similar 
percentage of intimate partner violence (35%) and 
nonintimate violence (34%) (table 7).

* A larger percentage of males experienced serious violence 
when victimized by an intimate (39%) than by a nonintimate 
(32%). 

* A larger percentage of females were physically attacked 
when victimized by an intimate partner (67%) than by a 
nonintimate offender (40%). 

* A larger percentage of males were physically attacked when 
victimized by an intimate partner (65%) than by a 
nonintimate offender (40%).

* A larger percentage of females were threatened prior to a 
victimization by an intimate (52%) than a nonintimate (34%) 
offender.

* A larger percentage of males were threatened prior to a 
victimization by an nonintimate (39%) than a intimate (31%).

* A larger percentage of females faced an offender with a 
weapon when victimized by a nonintimate (20%) than by an 
intimate (18%). No statistically significant differences 
were detected in the percentage of male intimate and 
nonintimate victimizations involving weapons.
 
* A larger percentage of females were injured when the 
offender was an intimate (50%) than a nonintimate (24%).
  
* A larger percentage of males were injured when the 
offender was an intimate (44%) than a nonintimate (22%).
* A larger percentage of females suffered serious physical 
injuries when the offender was an intimate (13%) than a 
nonintimate (5%).

* A similar percentage of males suffered serious physical 
injuries whether the offender was an intimate (5%) or a 
nonintimate (4%).

* A larger percentage of females sought treatment for their 
injuries when victimized by an intimate partner (18%) than a 
nonintimate offender (10%).

* A similar percentage of males sought treatment for 
injuries when victimized by an intimate (11%) or a 
nonintimate (10%).
***********************************************************

****************
Methodology 
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-
report survey in which interviewed persons are asked about 
the number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the past 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault) and property crimes 
(burglary, larceny-theft, arson, motor vehicle theft, and 
other theft) both reported and not reported to police. In 
addition to providing annual level and change estimates on 
criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of 
information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents. Survey respondents provide information about 
themselves (such as age, sex, race and ethnicity, marital 
status, education level, and income) and whether they 
experienced victimization. Information is collected for each 
victimization incident about the offender (such as age, race 
and ethnicity, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and experiences 
with the criminal justice system. 

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when 
they have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once 
selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, and 
eligible persons in these households are interviewed every 6 
months for a total of seven interviews. New households 
rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace 
outgoing households that have been in the sample for the 3-
year period. The sample includes persons living in group 
quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious 
group dwellings, and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings, such as correctional or 
hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For more detail, see 
the Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the 
United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS website, May 2011.) 

In 2011, about 143,120 persons age 12 or older from 79,800 
households across the country were interviewed during the 
year. The response rate was 88% of eligible individuals and 
90% of eligible households. Victimizations that occurred 
outside of the United States were excluded from this report. 
From 1993 to 2011, 291 (0.7%) of the total 43,805 unweighted 
nonfatal violent victimizations occurred outside of the 
United States and were excluded from the analysis. 

Weighting adjustments for estimating 
personal victimization 
****************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2011 NCVS 
data files weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than 
a census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed 
to inflate sample point estimates to known population totals 
and to compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects 
of the sample design. 

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Household weights provide an estimate of the total 
U.S. household population. Person weights provide an 
estimate of the population represented by each person in the 
sample. Person weights are most frequently used to compute 
estimates of criminal victimizations of persons in the total 
population. Both household and person weights, after proper 
adjustment, are also used to form the denominator in 
calculations of crime rates. 

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or to describe each event in detail. Survey procedures 
allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these 
similar victimizations as series victimizations and to 
collect detailed information on only the most recent 
incident in the series. In 2011, about 3% of all 
victimizations were series incidents. Weighting series 
incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 
incidents produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, 
while the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers 
on the rates. Additional information on the series 
enumeration is detailed in Methods for Counting High-
Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime 
Victimization Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.
 
Standard error computations
**************************************** 

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate or when comparing estimates 
over time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for 
which the estimate is computed. When the sampling error 
around the estimates is taken into consideration, the 
estimates that appear dif
ferent may, in fact, not be 
statistically different. 
One measure of the sampling error associated with an 
estimate is the standard error. The standard error can vary 
from one estimate to the next. In general, for a given 
metric, an estimate with a small standard error provides a 
more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with 
relatively large standard errors are associated with less 
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with 
caution. 

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into 
account aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and 
represent the curve fitted to a selection of individual 
standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication 
technique. The GVF parameters were used to generate standard 
errors for each point estimate (such as counts, percentages, 
and rates) in the report. For average annual estimates, 
standard errors were based on the ratio of the sums of 
victimizations and respondents across years. 

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, BJS set the significance level at the 95% 
confidence level. 

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence 
intervals: 

* According to the NCVS, in 2011, the rate intimate partner 
violence against females was 4.7 victimizations per 1,000 
females age 12 or older (see appendix table 1). Using the 
GVFs, BJS determined that the estimate has a standard error 
of 0.32 (see appendix table 2). A confidence interval around 
the estimate was generated by multiplying the standard error 
by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution 
that excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). 
Therefore, the confidence interval around the 4.7 estimate 
from 2011 is 4.7 ± .63 (0.32 X 1.96) or (4.07 to 5.33). In 
other words, if different samples using the same procedures 
were taken from the U.S. population in 2011, 95% of the time 
the rate of intimate partner victimization against females 
would fall between 4.07 and 5.33 per 1,000. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of 
estimates across measures with differing levels or metrics. 
In cases where the CV was greater than 50% or the unweighted 
sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a 
“!” symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based 
on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%).

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not 
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal 
inferences based on the results presented. 

Intimate partner violence and crime 
types defined
****************************************

As defined in the NCVS, intimate partner violence includes 
rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and 
simple assault (see definitions below) committed by an 
offender who is the victim’s current or former spouse, 
boyfriend, or girlfriend. For some victims, intimates are 
primarily restricted to boyfriends and girlfriends. Others 
may be inclined to perceive romantic relationships as 
friends or acquaintances rather than ascribing the level of 
intimacy associated with a boyfriend or girlfriend. 
Therefore, the characteristics of intimate partner violence 
as defined in this report may differ based on how the 
respondent perceives the relationship with the offender.
Crime types defined

Rape--Unlawful penetration of a person against the will of 
the victim, with use or threatened use of force, or 
attempting such an act. Includes psychological coercion and 
physical force. Forced sexual intercourse means vaginal, 
anal, or oral penetration by the offender. Also includes 
incidents where penetration is from a foreign object, such 
as a bottle. Includes male and female victims, and both 
heterosexual and same-sex rape. Attempted rape includes 
verbal threats of rape. (Rape and sexual assault are 
combined into one victimization measure.)

Robbery--The unlawful taking or attempted taking of property 
that is in the immediate possession of another, by force or 
threat of force, with or without a weapon, and with or 
without injury. 

Aggravated assault--An attack or attempted attack with a 
weapon, regardless of whether the victim is injured, or an 
attack without a weapon when serious injury results. 

Simple assault--An attack or attempted attack without a 
weapon that results in either no injury, minor injury (e.g., 
bruises, black eyes, cuts, scratches, or swelling) or an 
undetermined injury requiring less than 2 days of 
hospitalization

Attacks, attempted attacks, and 
threats of harm
****************************************

The NCVS used a two-part screening strategy. First, a 
screener was administered to a respondent, and if a 
potential crime was identified, a detailed incident form was 
then administered to the respondent to gather additional 
detail on the characteristics of the incident. The details 
gathered by the incident form were used in an algorithm that 
subsequently classified the event into specific crime types. 
During administration of the detailed incident form, 
respondents were asked a series of questions regarding 
attacks, attempted attacks, and threats of harm that they 
may have experienced during the crime. Respondents were 
first asked whether a physical attack occurred, and if so, 
the nature of the physical attack. For this report, response 
options for the type of attack in the NCVS were combined 
into similar categories of physical attack. See survey 
questions below.

Q. 24. Did the offender hit you, knock you down or actually 
attack you in any way? 
Yes
No

Q. 29a.­ How were you attacked?
Respondents who were attacked were asked if the offender 
threatened them prior to the attack: 

Q. 30a. Did the offender THREATEN to hurt you before you 
were actually attacked?
Yes
No
Other

Victims who were attacked were not subsequently asked 
detailed information regarding the type of threat that 
preceded the attack. In addition, it is not possible to 
ascertain from the survey whether the threat of harm 
immediately preceded the attack or whether the victim was 
threatened days, weeks, or even months earlier.

Victims who were not physically attacked were subsequently 
asked if the offender attempted to attack them or threatened 
them with harm. The victim was then asked to describe the 
nature of the attempted attack or threat. These 
victimizations are excluded from estimates of intimate 
partner violence involving physical attacks.

Methodological changes to 
the NCVS in 2006 
****************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that 
they are not comparable to estimates from other years. 
Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by 
BJS and the Census Bureau found a high degree of confidence 
that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 are 
consistent with and comparable to estimates for 2005 and 
previous years. For more information, see Criminal 
Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, BJS website, December 2007; 
Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, BJS website, 
December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, BJS 
website, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 
231327, BJS website, October 2010; Criminal Victimization, 
2010, NCJ 235508, BJS website, September 2011; and Criminal 
Victimization, 2011, NCJ 239437, BJS website, October 2012. 

Although caution is warranted when comparing data from 2006 
to other years, the combination of 2-year rolling averages 
and 10 years of aggregated data in this report diminishes 
the potential variation between 2006 and later years. Slight 
increases are observed when comparing averaged 2005–06 and 
2006–07 estimates. However, these increases do not change 
the findings when the long-term trends are examined. The 
effect of 2006 methodological changes on the aggregated 2002 
to 2011 analyses is less pronounced. In general, findings do 
not change significantly if the year 2006 is excluded from 
the analysis. The 2002 to 2011 average annual number of 
intimate partner victimizations, attacks by an intimate 
partner, and injuries sustained during intimate partner 
violence were not significantly different from the annual 
averages when 2006 data were excluded.
 
FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR)
**************************************** 

The homicide data in this report are from the FBI’s 
Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), which are a part of 
the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program. Supplemental data 
about homicide incidents are submitted monthly with details 
on location, victim, and offender characteristics. These 
reports include information on the reporting agency and its 
residential population, county and Metropolitan Statistical 
Area (MSA) codes, geographical division, and population 
group; on the age, race, and sex of victims and offenders; 
and on the victim-offender relationship, weapon use, and 
circumstance of the crime. From 1993 to 2010, contributing 
agencies provided supplemental data for 282,009 (or 88.7%) 
of the estimated 318,098 homicides.

Homicide includes murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, or 
the willful killing of one human being by another. This 
report excludes deaths caused by negligence, suicide, or 
accident; justifiable homicides; and attempts to murder. 
These homicide data are based solely on police 
investigation, as opposed to the determination of a court, 
medical examiner, coroner, jury, or other judicial body. Not 
all agencies that report offense information to the FBI also 
submit supplemental data on homicides. To compensate for 
nonreported homicides, BJS weighted the total number of 
homicide victims included in the SHR data to match the FBI’s 
state and national estimates of the total number of homicide 
victims.

***********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. 
Sabol is acting director. 

This report was written by Shannan Catalano. Jennifer Truman 
verified the report.

Vanessa Curto and Morgan Young edited the report. Barbara 
Quinn produced the report.

November 2013, NCJ 243300
***********************************************************

***********************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation • Partnerships • Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***********************************************************

**********************
11/6/2013/JER/ 12:40
**********************
