U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4759
----------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical Report
*******************

Measuring the Prevalence of Crime with the National Crime 
Victimization Survey

Janet L. Lauritsen, BJS Visiting Fellow
Maribeth L. Rezey, University of Missouri - St. Louis

**************
Introduction
**************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data collection designed 
to gather information about nonfatal personal crimes and 
household property crimes in the United States. The main purpose 
of the NCVS is to accurately measure the number and type of 
criminal victimizations that occur each year to persons age 12 or 
older. Victimization rates are most commonly used in NCVS reports 
to describe changes in the level of personal and household crime 
over time and the levels of crime experienced by different 
population subgroups. However, prevalence rates also may be used 
to describe changes in the level of crime over time and 
differences between subgroups. 

This report discusses victimization rates and prevalence rates 
and the value of each type of indicator for understanding 
criminal victimization. Using NCVS data, the report displays and 
compares trends in the victimization and prevalence rates from 
1993 to 2010. It also analyzes the differences between 
victimization and prevalence rates for various types of crime and 
demographic groups using data from the 2010 NCVS.

Defining victimization rates and prevalence rates
Annual estimates of a population’s risk for criminal 
victimization can be examined using victimization rates, incident 
rates, or prevalence rates. Historically, BJS reports using NCVS 
data rely on victimization rates, which measure the extent to 
which victimizations occur in a specified population and time 
period. For crimes affecting persons, NCVS victimization rates 
are estimated by dividing the number of victimizations that occur 
during a specified time period (T) by the population at risk for 
those victimizations and multiplying the rate by 1,000. These 
victimization rates permit comparisons of crime over time and 
between population subgroups.

	Number of victimizations experienced 
Victimization rate T = by specified population T
_________________________________________________________x1,000
	Number of persons in the specified population T

A victimization rate is typically larger than an alternative 
incident rate because more than one person can be victimized 
during a single incident of crime. For example, the armed robbery 
of two persons would be counted as one incident but as two 
victimizations. Using a victimization rate rather than an 
incident rate provides an estimate of the number of 
victimizations experienced by individuals (or by households in 
the case of household-based crimes). When the purpose of the rate 
is to describe the level of crime among persons in the 
population, victimization rates tend to be preferred over 
incident rates. Incident rates are more likely to be used when 
making comparisons to official law enforcement crime data, which 
generally count crime by the number of incidents rather than the 
number of victims.

Prevalence rates also describe the level of victimization but are 
based on the number of persons (or households) in the population 
who experienced at least one victimization during a specified 
time period. The key distinction between a victimization or 
incident rate and a prevalence rate is whether the numerator 
consists of the number of victimizations or the number of 
victims. Prevalence rates do not take into account the number of 
victimizations each victim experiences. These rates tell about 
the risk of experiencing at least one crime in a given period.

*************
HIGHLIGHTS
*************

* From 1993 to 2010, the decline in violent victimization rates 
(down 76%) was greater than the decline in prevalence rates (down 
63%).

For serious violent crimes, the victimization rate decreased 77% 
and the prevalence rate decreased 66%.

* In 1993, 77% of violent crime victims reported that they were 
victimized one time during the year, compared to 83% in 2010.

* The percentage of violent crime victims who experienced two or 
more victimizations during a year declined from 23% in 1993 to 
17% in 2010. In 2010, this 17% accounted for more than half (54%) 
of all violent victimizations.

* Victims of intimate partner violence (21%) were more likely to 
experience repeat victimization within the year than were victims 
of stranger violence (9%).

* From 1993 to 2010, the decline in total household property 
crime victimization rates (down 64%) was greater than the decline 
in prevalence rates (down 48%).

* The proportion of household property crime victims who reported 
two or more incidents during the year decreased from 25% in 1993 
to 18% in 2010.  In 2010, the 18% of repeat household victims 
accounted for about 41% of all household property victimizations.

* In 2010, 12% of burglary victims reported two or more incidents 
during the year, accounting for about 34% of all burglary 
victimizations.

****************************************************

                     BJS Visiting Fellows 
                     ---------------------

The BJS Visiting Fellows program is intended to facilitate 
collaboration between academic scholars and government 
researchers in survey methodology, statistics, economics, and 
social sciences. Visiting Fellows have the unique opportunity to 
address substantive, methodological and analytic issues relevant 
to BJS programs, and to further knowledge and understanding of 
criminal justice systems operation. Fellows conduct research at 
BJS or at their home site, use BJS data and facilities, and 
interact with BJS staff. Pending available funding, the program 
is normally conducted each year through a competitive 
solicitation. 

Applicants are limited to senior-level social science researchers 
or statisticians in the fields of statistics, survey methodology, 
mathematics, criminology, demography, economics, behavioral 
science, and other related fields. They must have an established 
research record in their field, have considerable expertise in 
their area of proposed research, and be willing to commit a 
substantial portion of their time (typically 6 to 18 months) to 
undertake analyses of existing BJS data. In addition, they must 
produce a report that both summarizes their analyses and meets 
BJS publication and data quality standards.  For further 
information, see: http://www.bjs.gov/content/fellows.cfm.
****************************************************

While prevalence rates are not often produced using NCVS data, it 
is possible to do so. For crimes affecting persons, prevalence 
rates are estimated by dividing the number of victims in the 
specified population by the total number of persons in the 
population and multiplying the rate by 1,000. When the same 
multiplier (1,000) is used, the prevalence rate can be compared 
to the victimization rate. Prevalence rates can also be based out 
of 100, which is simply the percentage of the population 
victimized at least once in a given period of time.

                   Number of victims in a specified population T
Prevalence rate T =_________________________________________-x 1,000
	            Number of persons in the specified population T

Victimization and prevalence rates may also be produced for 
household-based crimes, such as burglary. In these instances, the 
numerators and denominators are adjusted accordingly to reflect 
households rather than persons. 

When the prevalence rate and the victimization rate are estimated 
on a per 1,000 basis, the trends can show changes in the mean 
number of incidents per victim over time or the concentration of 
victimizations per victim. The mean number of incidents per 
victim is estimated by dividing the number of victimizations by 
the number of victims. Higher mean values are one indicator of 
the extent to which repeat victimization occurs.

                 	  Number of victimizations
   Concentration = ________________________________
	                  Number of victims

Once repeat victims are identified, the percentage of 
victimizations accounted for by these repeat victims can then be 
estimated using the following formula:

[V – (Y x P)] / V x 100

where 
V is the victimization rate per 1,000
Y is the proportion of victims with only one victimization
P is the prevalence rate per 1,000.

**************************************
The value of measuring victimization 
risk using different rates
**************************************

Both victimization and prevalence rates provide information about 
the level of and risk for crime. Using these together will better 
inform changes in the crime rate over time. For example, the 
crime rate may increase because of more victims or victimizations 
per victim or both. If the crime rate increases because there are 
more victimizations per victim (an increase in repeat 
victimization), a person’s risk of experiencing any victimization 
has not changed, but their risk for repeated victimization if 
they are a victim has increased. 

A considerable portion of the victimizations that occur 
(typically within a single year) are experienced by a small 
number of repeat victims. ***Footnote 1 See Grove, L., G. Farrell, 
D. Farrington, and S. Johnson. (2012). Preventing repeat 
victimization: A systematic review. Stockholm: The Swedish 
National Council for Crime Prevention***. This suggests that 
identifying repeat victims may present a unique opportunity to 
reduce crime rates, as it focuses attention on those who 
disproportionately experience victimization. However, if repeat 
victims are unique from other crime victims, focusing on repeat 
victims may result in crime reductions that are not uniform 
across all types of crime, victim characteristics, and degrees of 
crime severity.
 
The extent of repeat victimization and the potential value of 
focusing efforts on repeat victims can only be known if 
prevalence rates and victimization rates are distinguished. For 
instance, some forms of repeat victimization (such as household 
burglary) tend to occur within relatively short time intervals 
after the initial victimization. ***Footnote 2 Forrester, D., S. 
Frenz, M. O’Connell, and K. Pease. (1990). The Kirkholt burglary 
prevention project. Home Office Crime Prevention Unit Paper 13. 
London: Home Office***. If underlying patterns of repeat 
victimization can be determined by examining prevalence rates, 
efforts focused on reducing future victimization by those 
recently victimized may result in greater decreases in crime than 
strategies that are more broadly targeted. 

It is also valuable to understand and report victimization rates. 
To a large extent, reports based on NCVS data typically provide 
annual victimization rates rather than prevalence rates because 
the NCVS serves as an alternative to annual police-based 
estimates of crime from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR). 
***Footnote 3 Groves, R. and D. Cork., eds. (2008). Surveying 
victims: Options for conducting the National Crime Victimization 
Survey. Washington DC: National Research Council***. NCVS-based 
estimates of the levels and changes in crime are routinely 
compared to estimates generated using UCR data, which only 
include incidents reported to or recorded by the police. 
Prevalence rates cannot be easily compared to police rates of 
crime because they count unique victims and not the number of 
crimes. 

Reporting on changes in the victimization rate is also important 
because criminal events initiate criminal justice system 
activities, such as police investigations, arrests, and 
subsequent prosecutions, sentencing outcomes, and the provision 
of victim services. Therefore, NCVS victimization rates are 
capable of providing information that can be used for making key 
decisions for criminal justice system operations. 

*****************************************
Victimization rates and prevalence rates 
for personal violence: 1993–2010
*****************************************

The NCVS measures the violent crimes of rape and sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault, and includes 
both completed and attempted crimes. From 1993 to 2010, declines 
occurred in both the victimization rate and the prevalence rate 
of violent victimization (figure 1). The violent victimization 
rate declined 76%, from 79.8 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 
1993 to 19.3 per 1,000 in 2010.***Footnote 4 Annual victimization 
rates include series victimizations and count such incidents 
based on the number of times the victim reported that the 
victimization occurred, up to a maximum of 10 times. See 
Methodology for more information.***

During the same period, the prevalence rate for violent crime 
declined 63%, from 29.3 to 10.8 per 1,000. Since the decline in 
the victimization rate was greater than the decline in the 
prevalence rate, the mean number of victimizations per victim 
also declined, from 2.7 victimizations per victim in 1993 to 1.8 
in 2010 (table 1).

Over time, both the number of persons victimized and the average 
number of victimizations each victim experienced declined, with 
the number of victimizations declining at a faster rate than the 
number of victims. In 1993, 6.2 million victims experienced 16.8 
million victimizations, while in 2010, 2.8 million victims 
experienced 4.9 million victimizations (table 2).

The distribution of violent victimization reported in the NCVS is 
skewed, as most persons experienced no victimizations and the 
majority of victims reported one victimization during the year. 
In 1993, of the 2.9% of the population that experienced at least 
one violent victimization, approximately 77% reported that they 
were victimized once, which increased to 83% in 2010 when 1.1% of 
the population experienced at least one violent victimization. 
About 23% of violent crime victims in 1993 and 17% in 2010 
experienced repeat victimization. Over this period, both the 
percentage of the population victimized and the percentage of 
those repeatedly victimized declined. 

Because of this skew in the distribution of violent 
victimization, both the modal category (one victimization during 
the year) and the mean should be considered as statistical 
estimates of the risk for repeat victimization. It is not fully 
accurate to say that in 2010 the typical violent crime victim 
experienced 1.8 victimizations per year in 2010, since 83% of 
victims experienced only one victimization during the year. More 
accurately, most victims of violent crime in a given year 
experienced one victimization, and a small percentage of victims 
reported repeat victimizations. Though the percentage of victims 
who experienced repeat violence of any form in 2010 was 
comparatively small, the 17% who did experience repeat violence 
accounted for 54% of all of the violent victimizations that 
occurred in that year. In contrast, in 1993 the 23% of victims 
who experienced repeat victimization accounted for 72% of the 
violent victimizations that occurred that year (not shown in 
table).

*****************
Serious violence
*****************

The rate of serious violent victimization--rape and sexual 
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault--declined 77%, from 29.1 
per 1,000 in 1993 to 6.6 per 1,000 in 2010 (figure 2). The 
prevalence rate declined 66%, from 12.6 per 1,000 in 1993 to 4.3 
per 1,000 in 2010. Because the victimization rate declined more 
than the prevalence rate, the average number of serious violent 
victimizations per victim declined from 2.3 to 1.5 victimizations 
(table 1). The majority of serious violent crime victims reported 
experiencing one victimization during the year. In 1993, 16% of 
serious violent crime victims experienced repeat victimization 
within the year, compared to 8% in 2010. Repeat victims accounted 
for 40% of all serious violence in 2010 and 63% of all serious 
violence in 1993 (not shown in table).

************************
Rape and sexual assault
************************

Similar to other forms of violence, the victimization and 
prevalence rates for rape and sexual assault among females age 12 
or older declined overall from 1993 to 2010 (figure 3). The 
female victimization rate for rape and sexual assault declined 
75% from 1993 to 2010 (from 7.7 to 1.9 per 1,000), while the 
prevalence rate declined 63% (from 2.6 to 1.0 per 1,000). 

The average number of rape and sexual assault victimizations per 
female victim was 2.9 in 1993 and 2.0 in 2010. The proportion of 
female rape and sexual assault victims reporting one incident 
during the year was 74% in 1993 and 85% in 2010 (table 1).

********
Robbery 
********

The robbery victimization rate declined 73%, from 8.3 in 1993 to 
2.2 per 1,000 in 2010 (figure 4). During the same period, the 
prevalence rate declined 59%, from 3.9 to 1.6 per 1,000. On 
average, victims of robbery experienced 2.1 victimizations in 
1993, compared to 1.4 in 2010. The proportion of robbery victims 
who reported experiencing one robbery during the year was 91% in 
1993 and 97% in 2010. Robbery victims were less likely to 
experience a repeat victimization during the year than rape and 
sexual assault and simple assault victims (table 1).

*******************
Aggravated assault
*******************

The aggravated assault victimization rate declined 80%, from 16.5 
per 1,000 in 1993 to 3.4 in 2010 (figure 5). During the same 
period, the prevalence rate declined 71%, from 7.6 to 2.2 per 
1,000. The average number of aggravated assault victimizations 
per victim declined from 2.2 in 1993 to 1.5 in 2010. In 1993, 86% 
of aggravated assault victims reported one aggravated assault 
victimization, compared to 94% in 2010 (table 1). 

Since aggravated assaults made up the majority of serious violent 
crimes, the mean number of victimizations and the percentage of 
victims with one aggravated assault victimization were similar to 
the estimates for overall serious violence. In 1993, aggravated 
assault victims were less likely than rape and sexual assault 
victims--but more likely than robbery victims--to experience a 
repeat victimization within the year. However, in 2010, a similar 
percentage of aggravated assault victims experienced repeat 
victimization as rape and sexual assault and robbery victims. 

****************
Simple assault
****************

The simple assault victimization rate declined 75%, from 50.7 per 
1,000 in 1993 to 12.7 per 1,000 in 2010 (figure 6). The 
prevalence rate declined 62% during the same period, from 18.4 to 
6.9 per 1,000. Victims of simple assault experienced an average 
of 2.8 victimizations in 1993 and 1.8 in 2010. The percentage of 
simple assault victims who reported one victimization during the 
year was 77% in 1993 and 82% in 2010.

The average number of simple assault victimizations per victim 
was most comparable to that found for female rape and sexual 
assault. This was also true for the proportion of simple assault 
victims who experienced more than one victimization during the 
year. Since rape and sexual assault had the lowest victimization 
rate and simple assault had the highest, the similar levels of 
repeat victimization among the two crime types indicates that 
risk for repeat victimization is not simply due to high or low 
crime rates.

*************************
Percentage experiencing 
violent crime
*************************

When prevalence rates are computed as a percentage of the 
population experiencing crime, the levels and changes in the risk 
for victimization for each of the types of violent crime can be 
compared from 1993 to 2010. For rape and sexual assault, the 
percentage was calculated for females age 12 or older. For the 
other types of violence, the percentages were based on all 
persons age 12 or older. 

The percentage of the population experiencing simple assault was 
consistently more than twice as high as the percentage 
experiencing any other type of violent crime (figure 7). In 1993, 
1.8% of the population age 12 or older experienced simple 
assault, 0.8% experienced aggravated assault, 0.4% were victims 
of robbery, and 0.3% of females were victims of rape and sexual 
assault. In 2010, 0.7% of the population age 12 or older 
experienced simple assault, 0.2% experienced aggravated assault, 
0.2% were victims of robbery, and 0.1% of females age 12 or older 
were victims of rape or sexual assault. In total, approximately 
1% of the population age 12 or older experienced some form of 
violent victimization at least once in 2010 (not shown in table).

****************************************
Violent victimization and prevalence 
rates for selected subgroups and 
types of violence during 2010
****************************************

To further illustrate how violent victimization rates and 
prevalence rates are distributed in the population, rates for 
specific subgroups and additional types of violence were 
examined. Comparisons between victimization rates and prevalence 
rates are important for understanding the level of and risk for 
different subtypes of violence, such as stranger violence and 
intimate partner violence.

Although differences were found in earlier years, the violent 
victimization rates among males and females did not differ in 
2010, when the rate for males was 20.1 per 1,000, compared to 
18.5 for females (table 3). No differences were detected in the 
prevalence rates for violent crime between males (11.4 per 1,000) 
and females (10.1 per 1,000). Because there were no statistically 
significant differences in either the victimization rates or the 
prevalence rates in 2010, the average number of violent 
victimizations for male and female victims was also similar.

Greater differences in the risk for violence were found across 
age groups. Persons age 35 or older had significantly lower 
victimization rates (12.5 per 1,000) than persons ages 12 to 34. 
The differences in the victimization rates between the younger 
age groups (i.e., persons ages 12 to 17, persons ages 18 to 24, 
and persons ages 25 to 34) were not statistically significant. 
However, prevalence rates suggest that the risk for violence for 
persons ages 25 to 34 (13.8 per 1,000) was lower than the risk 
for persons ages 18 to 24 (19.9 per 1,000). The differences 
across age groups in the prevalence and victimization rates and 
in the average number of victimizations per victim may reflect 
the types of violence that persons of different ages are most 
likely to experience.

Overall, the victimization rates for the total population were 
significantly lower for violence committed by nonintimate family 
members (1.4 per 1,000) than they were for violence committed by 
intimate partners (3.0 per 1,000), friends and acquaintances (6.1 
per 1,000), and strangers (7.1 per 1,000) (table 4). The 
prevalence rates of violence committed by a stranger were similar 
to rates of violence committed by friends and acquaintances, and 
higher than the rates of violence committed by an intimate 
partner or relative. The prevalence rates revealed that the 
highest rate was for violence committed by a stranger (4.7 per 
1,000), while the lowest rate was for violence committed by a 
nonintimate relative (0.9 per 1,000).

The differences between the victimization and prevalence rates 
across these relationship categories showed that the mean number 
of victimizations per victim was lower for victims of stranger 
violence than for victims of intimate partner violence. The data 
also indicated that victims of stranger violence were less likely 
to experience repeat victimization during the year, compared to 
victims who knew the offender. For example, 9% of victims of 
stranger violence experienced repeat victimization in 2010, 
compared to 21% of intimate partner violence victims who 
experienced repeat victimization.

Even though overall violent victimization rates among males and 
females were about the same in 2010, males and females 
experienced different levels of risk based on victim-offender 
relationship. ***Footnote 5 See Truman, J. (2011). Criminal 
victimization, 2010. Washington DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 235508***. Both victimization 
and prevalence rates suggest similar patterns in violence against 
males and females according to victim-offender relationship. 

Violent victimization committed by relatives and by friends and 
acquaintances occurred at similar rates among males and females 
in 2010. However, the rates of stranger violence and intimate 
partner violence differed between males and females. 
Victimization rates for stranger violence against males (9.5 per 
1,000) were nearly twice as large as the rates for females (4.7 
per 1,000). The prevalence rates for stranger victimization were 
also greater among males (6.0 per 1,000 for males, compared to 
3.5 per 1,000 for females). Victimization rates for intimate 
partner violence against females (4.9 per 1,000) were greater 
than the rates against males (1.1 per 1,000), as were the 
prevalence rates for intimate partner violence (2.2 per 1,000 for 
females, compared to 0.5 per 1,000 for males). 

The average number of victimizations per year for male and female 
victims of violence committed by other family members (1.7 for 
males and 1.6 for females), friends and acquaintances (1.8 for 
males and 2.0 for females), and strangers (1.6 for males and 1.3 
for females) were similar. The average number of victimizations 
among victims of intimate partner violence was also similar for 
males (2.3) and females (2.2), although the prevalence rate for 
females was higher than it was for males.

In general, the relationship between age and victimization risk 
was the same across victim-offender relationship regardless of 
whether victimization rates or prevalence rates were used (table 
5). For example, using both victimization and prevalence rates, 
persons age 35 or older had the lowest risk for violence by 
strangers, by friends and acquaintances, and by intimate 
partners. ***Footnote 6 Intimate partner comparisons excluded 
persons ages 12 to 17. The 2010 NCVS data are insufficient for 
producing reliable estimates of intimate partner violence rates 
among youth ages 12 to 17***. Victimization rates and prevalence 
rates both showed that persons ages 18 to 24 had the highest risk 
for violence by strangers, while the risk for intimate partner 
violence was highest among persons ages 18 to 24 and ages 25 to 
34.
 
In addition, the magnitudes of the age differences in risk were 
similar within victim-offender categories when based on both 
victimization and prevalence rates. For instance, the 
victimization rates suggested that persons ages 12 to 17 were 4.7 
times more likely to be victimized by friends and acquaintances 
than were persons age 35 or older, while the prevalence rates 
suggested that this ratio was 4.6. In other words, victimization 
rates and prevalence rates revealed similar patterns in the 
relationship between age and victimization risk for these 
categorizations of violence.

*****************************************
Victimization rates and prevalence rates 
for household property crime: 1993–2010
*****************************************

The NCVS measures household property victimization, including 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft. The total 
household property victimization rate declined 64% from 1993 to 
2010, from 351.8 to 125.4 victimizations per 1,000 households 
(figure 8). The prevalence rate for household property crime 
declined 48%, from 171.6 per 1,000 in 1993 to 89.2 in 2010. The 
decline in the victimization rate compared to the prevalence rate 
resulted in a decline in the average number of victimizations per 
victimized household, from 2.1 victimizations per year in 1993 to 
1.4 in 2010 (table 6).

The differences between the prevalence and victimization rate 
percentage change estimates for property crime (16 percentage 
points) were comparable to the differences found for violent 
crime (13 percentage points). Similar to total violent 
victimization, the distribution of household victimization was 
skewed, and the majority of victimized households reported one 
victimization during the year. In 1993, approximately 75% of 
victimized households reported one victimization during the year, 
and in 2010, this proportion increased to 82%. During 2010, the 
18% of households victimized by repeat property crime accounted 
for approximately 41% of all property crime victimizations. In 
comparison, in 1993 the 25% of households that experienced repeat 
victimization accounted for 64% of all property crime 
victimizations (not shown in table).

**********
Burglary
**********

The burglary victimization rate declined 60%, from 63.9 per 1,000 
households in 1993 to 25.8 in 2010, while the prevalence rate for 
burglary declined 46%, from 36.2 per 1,000 households in 1993 to 
19.4 in 2010 (figure 9). The average number of victimizations 
among victims of household burglary was 1.8 per year in 1993 and 
1.3 in 2010 (table 6).

A similar proportion of burglary victims experienced one incident 
in 1993 and 2010. In 2010, approximately 12% of burglary victims 
experienced a repeat burglary. These victims of repeat burglary 
accounted for about a third (34%) of all burglary victimizations 
in 2010 and 52% of all burglary victimizations in 1993 (not shown 
in table).

*********************
Motor vehicle theft
*********************

Like other household crimes, both the victimization rate (down 
74%) and the prevalence rate (down 65%) showed declines in motor 
vehicle theft from 1993 to 2010 (figure 10). The victimization 
rate for motor vehicle theft declined from 19.3 to 4.9 per 1,000 
households, while the prevalence rate declined from 12.1 to 4.3 
per 1,000 households. The greater decline in the victimization 
rate compared to the prevalence rate produced a decline in the 
average number of victimizations per victimized household, from 
1.6 to 1.2 motor vehicle thefts per year (table 6). Between 1993 
and 2010, the proportion of motor vehicle theft victims who 
experienced only one incident in the calendar year increased 
slightly from 92% to 96%. Of the three types of household thefts, 
victims of motor vehicle theft were the least likely to 
experience a repeat victimization during the year.

*******
Theft
*******

The third type of household crime measured in the NCVS was theft, 
which occurred more frequently than burglary and motor vehicle 
theft. Like other household crimes, theft exhibited declines over 
time (figure 11). The victimization rate for theft declined 65%, 
from 268.6 per 1,000 households in 1993 to 94.6 in 2010. The 
prevalence rate for theft declined 49%, from 136.7 per 1,000 
households in 1993 to 70.1 in 2010. The average number of thefts 
per victimized household decreased from 2.0 in 1993 to 1.3 in 
2010 (table 7). Victims of theft were more likely than victims of 
other household crimes to experience a repeat victimization. 
Between 1993 and 2010, the proportion of theft victims who 
experienced one incident in the year increased slightly, from 78% 
to 84%. In 2010, 16% of household theft victims experienced a 
repeat victimization, compared to 12% of burglary victims and 4% 
of motor vehicle theft victims.

*********
Summary
*********

From a criminal justice system perspective, it is beneficial to 
understand the rate at which victimization occurs among a 
population and the prevalence of victims within that population. 
Victimization and prevalence rates can help detect whether any 
change in the criminal victimization rate resulted from a change 
in the number of victims or the number of victimizations per 
victim. These rates also help identify which groups are prone to 
repeat victimization and the risk associated with being 
victimized.

Victimization rate data can be used to assess the needs of the 
criminal justice system as the occurrence of an event initiates 
certain activities (e.g., investigations, arrests, and 
prosecutions). Prevalence rate data may be used to estimate the 
number of victims requiring services in a given year. This report 
discusses the use of victimization rates and prevalence rates in 
the NCVS data, and how both help identify the level of crime and 
distribution of the risk for violence and household theft across 
the population. 

****************************
Violent victimization rates
*****************************

When analyzing long-term trends for violent crime, examining both 
victimization rates and prevalence rates in the NCVS led to 
similar conclusions about changes in the risk for victimization 
over time. Both indicators showed large declines in the risk for 
violent victimization between 1993 and 2010; however, annual 
victimization rates showed that the magnitude of decline in risk 
for violence was greater than the decline in annual prevalence 
rates. For total violence, the difference in the estimate of 
change between victimization rates (down 76% from 1993 to 2010) 
and prevalence rates (down 63%) was 13 percentage points. In 
addition, the victimization rates for violent crime were 
approximately 2 to 3 times greater than the prevalence rates in 
1993 and about 1.5 to 2 times greater in 2010.

Examination of the prevalence rates also showed that 83% of the 
victims of violence experienced one victimization in 2010. The 
17% of victims who experienced repeat victimization accounted for 
54% of all violent victimizations that occurred that year, 
indicating that significant reductions in violence could 
potentially be achieved by preventing repeat victimization. 
Because the majority of victims (83%) did not experience 
additional violence in 2010, determining which victims are most 
likely to experience repeat victimization is a challenge for 
research and practice.

*********************
Rates for subgroups
*********************

The comparisons of differences by age and sex in overall violence 
resulted in generally similar conclusions regardless of whether 
victimization rates or prevalence rates were used to make the 
comparisons. However, the distinction between victimization and 
prevalence rates was most useful when describing rates of 
violence according to victim-offender relationship. Intimate 
partner violence victims were more likely to experience repeat 
violence within a year, compared to victims of stranger violence. 
Without taking into consideration the challenges associated with 
targeting intimate partner violence compared to stranger 
violence, this finding suggests that successfully targeting 
victims of intimate partner violence to prevent repeat 
victimization would result in a proportionately greater reduction 
in violence than targeting victims of stranger violence.

The patterns also show that when the average number of incidents 
per victim was similar across subgroups, such as the average 
number of violent victimizations for male (1.8) and female (1.8) 
victims in 2010, these averages may hide differences in the 
composition of the types of victimizations experienced by each 
group and variation in the repeated nature of some types of 
violence (e.g., stranger) across the groups. Therefore, caution 
must be used when interpreting subgroup averages in the annual 
number of victimizations per victim, because these averages may 
be a combination of different kinds of processes and violent 
events.

Age and sex are not the only subgroup comparisons that maybe 
examined, nor is the victim-offender relationship the only 
categorization of violence that should be considered when 
studying victimization and prevalence rates. Further research 
would need to be completed to better understand where the risk of 
repeat victimization is greatest. Additional assessments may 
reveal some subgroups or forms of violence for which there are 
larger distinctions between victimization rates and prevalence 
rates. For instance, there may be differences across race and 
Hispanic origin or across urban, suburban, and rural residents. 
Variations in the patterns may also be found if violence is 
categorized by location of occurrence, such as in the home, at 
school, or in a public location. In addition, this report 
examines subgroup comparisons using data from the 2010 NCVS. 
However, the distinction between victimization rates and 
prevalence rates in subgroup comparisons could be more critical 
during periods when overall violence rates were higher, such as 
the early to mid-1990s.

**********************
Property crime rates
**********************

As with violent crimes, long-term trends in household property 
crime resulted in similar conclusions regardless of whether 
victimization rates or prevalence rates were used. Both rates 
showed large declines in the risk for household property crime 
between 1993 and 2010, although the percentage change in annual 
property victimization rates (down 64%) was greater than the 
percentage change in annual prevalence rates (down 48%).

Household crimes exhibited smaller differences between 
victimization rates and prevalence rates than were found among 
the violent crimes. In 2010, the victimization rates for 
household crimes were approximately 1.4 times greater than the 
prevalence rates, compared to approximately 1.8 times greater for 
violent crime rates. However, during the same year, the 
proportion of household property crime victims who experienced 
one victimization (82%) was similar to the proportion of violent 
crime victims who experienced one victimization (83%). This 
indicates that the distribution of violent victimization was more 
often characterized by a few high-rate repeat victims than the 
distribution of household property crime victimization.
 
For household property crimes, victimizations were less 
concentrated. Repeat victims accounted for a lower proportion of 
total property crime (41%) than violent crime (54%) 
victimization, which suggests that the factors underlying repeat 
victimization are different for household crimes and violent 
victimizations. In addition, this finding suggests that 
reductions in repeat violence would have a greater impact on the 
total number of violent victimizations than reductions in repeat 
property victimization would have on the number of property crime 
victimizations.

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in 
which interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations experienced during the prior 6 
months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal personal crimes 
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, 
and personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level and 
change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the 
primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents. Survey respondents provide information 
about themselves (e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, 
marital status, education level, and income) and whether they 
experienced a victimization. Information is collected for each 
victimization incident about the offender (e.g., age, race and 
Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, reasons 
the crime was or was not reported, and experiences with the 
criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered household 
members when the sampled address is their usual place of 
residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in-person or 
over the phone, for a total of seven interviews. Generally, all 
first interviews are conducted in-person. New households rotate 
into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing 
households that have been in sample for the 3-year period. The 
sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, and 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities, and the 
homeless. (For more information, see the Survey Methodology for 
Criminal Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, 
BJS Web, May 2011.) 

In 2010, about 41,000 households and 73,300 individuals 
age 12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 92.3% of 
households and 87.5% of eligible individuals. Victimizations that 
occurred outside of the U.S. were excluded from this report. From 
1993 to 2010, 1,657 (0.8%) of the total 197,849 unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the U.S.

Weighting adjustments for 
estimating victimization
********************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2010 NCVS data 
files. These files can be weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a 
census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to 
inflate sample point estimates to known population totals and to 
compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the sample 
design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household weights. 
Person weights provide an estimate of the population represented 
by each person in the sample. Household weights provide an 
estimate of the U.S. household population represented by each 
household in the sample. After proper adjustment, both household 
and person weights are also typically used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Annual victimization estimates are derived by accumulating 
estimates across the two 6-month interview periods. The weights 
of all crimes reported during interviews in that year are summed, 
regardless of when the crime occurred. This method provides 
annual estimates of victimization, the typical measure reported 
from NCVS analyses. Victimization weights used in this analysis 
account for the number of persons present during an incident and 
for repeat victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series victimizations 
are similar in type but occur with such frequency that a victim 
is unable to recall each individual event or describe each event 
in detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify 
and classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and to collect detailed information on only the 
most recent incident in the series. In 2010, about 3% of all 
victimizations were series incidents. Weighting series incidents 
as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents 
produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap 
at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed in 
the report Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 
237308, BJS Web, April 2012.

This report also measures prevalence rates of victimization. The 
prevalence estimate rate for a violent crime is a measure of the 
number of unique persons age 12 or older that experienced a 
violent victimization in a given year, regardless of the number 
or frequency of victimizations. The prevalence estimate rate for 
household property crime is a measure of the number of unique 
households that experienced a household property victimization in 
a given year, regardless of the number or frequency of 
victimizations.

Person victimization weights were constructed to ensure that a 
person who experienced more than one nonfatal violent 
victimization within a 6-month period or in both 6-month periods 
in a given year was counted only once in that annual prevalence 
estimate. Similarly, household victimization weights were 
constructed to ensure that a household that experienced one or 
more property crime victimizations within a 6-month period or in 
both 6-month periods in a given year was counted only once in 
that annual prevalence estimate. 

Not all persons (or households) surveyed in the NCVS in a given 
year are interviewed twice. Because the NCVS uses a rotating 
panel design with 6-month recall periods, some persons were 
interviewed once only during the first half of the year because 
that was their last intended interview. Others who were 
interviewed only once during the first half of the year may have 
moved out of a sampled household, or their second intended 
interview for that year was not obtained for some other reason. 
Another group of persons were interviewed once only during the 
second half of the year because that was their first intended 
interview, because the persons recently moved into a currently 
sampled household, or they were missing a prior interview from 
the first half of the year for some other reason. The assumption 
underlying the annual prevalence rate estimates is that the 
annual rate of victimization for persons interviewed twice is 
similar to the rate of persons interviewed once. This assumption 
was tested using data from 2009 and 2010 NCVS interviews. Those 
tests showed that the prevalence rates of those interviewed twice 
were not significantly different from those interviewed once. The 
prevalence rates of persons interviewed only in the first half of 
the year were somewhat lower than the prevalence rates for 
persons interviewed twice, while persons interviewed only in the 
second half of the year had prevalence rates that were somewhat 
higher than those interviewed twice. The average of the rates of 
the two groups of persons interviewed once was not significantly 
different from the average of those interviewed twice.

Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the case 
with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate 
to another estimate or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates based 
on a sample have some degree of sampling error. The sampling 
error of an estimate depends on several factors, including the 
amount of variation in the responses and the size of the sample. 
When the sampling error around the estimates is taken into 
consideration, the estimates that appear different may not be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate 
to the next. In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a 
smaller standard error provides a more reliable approximation of 
the true value than an estimate with a larger standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are associated 
with less precision and reliability and should be interpreted 
with caution. In order to generate standard errors around numbers 
and estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs 
take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and 
represent the curve fitted to a selection of individual standard 
errors based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The 
GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each 
point estimate (such as counts, percentages, and rates) in the 
report. 

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically for 
the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s t-
statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% confidence 
level.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 2010, the violent victimization rate 
among persons age 12 or older was 19.3 per 1,000 (see table 1). 
Using the GVFs, it was determined that the victimization rate 
estimate has a standard error of 0.84 (see appendix table 2). A 
confidence interval around the estimate was generated by 
multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a 
normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end 
of the distribution). Therefore, the confidence interval around 
the 19.3 estimate from 2010 is equal to 19.3 ± 1.65 (.84 X 1.96) 
or 17.65 to 20.95. In others words, if different samples using 
the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 2010, 
95% of the time the violent victimization rate would fall between 
17.65 and 20.95. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means to compare the precision of estimates across measures with 
differing levels or metrics. In cases where the CV was greater 
than 50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the 
estimate was noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with 
caution; estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the 
coefficient of variation exceeds 50%).

Methodological changes 
to the NCVS in 2006
***********************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected the 
crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they are not 
comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation of 2007 and 
later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau 
found a high degree of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 
2009, and 2010 are consistent with and comparable to estimates 
for 2005 and previous years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 
2006, NCJ 219413, December 2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, 
NCJ 224390, December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 
227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 231327, 
October 2010; and Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 235508, 
September 2011, are available on the BJS website. 

References
************

Forrester, D., S. Frenz, M. O’Connell, and K. Pease. (1990). The 
Kirkholt burglary prevention project. Home Office Crime 
Prevention Unit Paper 13. London: Home Office.

Grove, L., G. Farrell, D. Farrington, and S. Johnson. (2012). 
Preventing repeat victimization: A systematic review. Stockholm: 
The Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention.

Groves, R. and D. Cork., eds. (2008). Surveying victims: Options 
for conducting the National Crime Victimization Survey. 
Washington DC: National Research Council.

Lauritsen, J. (2012). Violent repeat victimization: Prospects and 
challenges for research and practice. National Institute of 
Justice, Research for the Real World Seminar. Available at: 
http://www.nij.gov/events/research-real-world.htm

Lauritsen, J., J. Gatewood Owens, M. Planty, M. Rand, and J. 
Truman. (2012). Methods for counting high-frequency repeat 
victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
BJS Web, NCJ 237308.

Truman, J. (2011). Criminal Victimization, 2010, BJS Web, NCJ 
235508.

****************************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, analyses, 
and disseminates statistical information on crime, criminal 
offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of justice systems 
at all levels of government. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Janet L. Lauritsen, BJS Visiting 
Fellow, and Maribeth L. Rezey, University of Missouri - St. 
Louis. Lynn Langton provided statistical review and verification 
of the report.


Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara Quinn produced the 
report, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

September 2013, NCJ 241656
****************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************
8/21/13/JER/11:45am
************************
