U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4984
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

Nonfatal Domestic Violence, 2003–2012

Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., and Rachel E. Morgan, Ph.D., BJS 
Statisticians

For the 10-year aggregate period 2003–12, domestic violence 
accounted for 21% of all violent victimizations (figure 1). 
Domestic violence includes rape, sexual assault, robbery, and 
aggravated and simple assault committed by intimate partners, 
immediate family members, or other relatives. Intimate 
partner violence (15%) accounted for a greater percentage of 
all violent victimizations, compared to violence committed by 
immediate family members (4%) or other relatives (2%). Well-
known or casual acquaintances accounted for 32% of all 
violent victimizations, and strangers accounted for 38%.
 
This report uses data from the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS) to describe the characteristics and patterns of 
domestic violence. Domestic violence includes victimizations 
committed by intimate partners (current or former spouses, 
boyfriends, or girlfriends), immediate family members 
(parents, children, or siblings), and other relatives. It 
details the number, percentage, and demographic 
characteristics of domestic violence victims, and describes 
victim and incident characteristics by the victim–offender 
relationship. Incident characteristics include the type of 
violence, the offender’s use of a weapon, victim injury and 
medical treatment, and whether the incident was reported to 
the police. The report focuses on domestic violence, but 
includes estimates of violence committed by acquaintances and 
strangers to provide comparisons.

***********************************************

************
Highlights
************

* This report describes domestic violence—violence committed 
by intimate partners, immediate family members, or other 
relatives—by victim and incident characteristics. Data are 
from the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). In 2003–
12:

* Domestic violence accounted for 21% of all violent crime. 
Intimate partner violence (15%) accounted for a greater 
percentage of all violent victimizations than violence 
committed by immediate family members (4%) or other relatives 
(2%).

* Current or former boyfriends or girlfriends committed most 
domestic violence.

* The majority of domestic violence was committed against 
females (76%) compared to males (24%).

* A similar percentage of violence by intimate partners and 
immediate family members was reported to police (56% each). 
An estimated 49% of violence by other relatives was reported 
to police.

* Most domestic violence (77%) occurred at or near the 
victim’s home.

* Intimate partner violence resulted in injuries more often 
than violence perpetrated by immediate family members and 
other relatives.

* A weapon was involved in a larger percentage of violence 
committed by other relatives (26%) than intimate partners 
(19%) and immediate family members (19%).
***********************************************

The trend estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages 
centered on the most recent year. For example, estimates 
reported for 1994 represent the average estimates for 1993 
and 1994. For ease of discussion, the report refers to all 2-
year estimates by the most recent year. Rolling averages 
generally improve the reliability and stability of estimate 
comparisons over time. Other tables in this report focus on 
the most recent 10-year aggregate period from 2003 through 
2012, used throughout the report as 2003–12. Both approaches—
using rolling averages and aggregating years—increase the 
reliability and stability of estimates and facilitate 
comparisons of detailed victimization characteristics.

As with any source of information, there are limitations with 
the current data that should be recognized. Because the 
nature of the victim–offender relationship is defined by the 
victim, the characteristics of intimate partner violence as 
defined in this report may differ based on how the respondent 
perceives their relationship with the offender. To some 
victims, intimate relationships with offenders may be 
primarily restricted to current or former boyfriends or 
girlfriends. Others may describe those offenders as friends 
or acquaintances rather than boyfriends or girlfriends. 

Also, because the NCVS reflects a respondent’s marital status 
at the time of the interview, it is not possible to determine 
whether a person was separated or divorced at the time of the 
victimization or whether separation or divorce followed the 
violence. However, most intimate partner violence committed 
against those with a separated marital status was by a spouse 
or ex-spouse.

***********************************************

*********************************
The National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS)
*********************************

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and 
not reported to police against persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. It 
produces national rates and levels of violent and property 
victimization, information on the characteristics of crimes 
and victims, and the consequences of victimization. Since the 
NCVS is based on interviews with victims, it does not measure 
homicide.

This report examines violent crimes, which include rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) classifies 
rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault as 
serious violent crimes. The survey also measures property 
crime and personal larceny. (For additional estimates not 
included in this report, see the NCVS Victimization Analysis 
Tool (NVAT) on the BJS website.)

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout 
this report. A victimization is a crime as it affects one 
person or household. For personal crimes, the number of 
victimizations is equal to the number of victims present 
during a criminal incident. The number of victimizations may 
be greater than the number of criminal incidents because more 
than one person may be victimized during an incident. Each 
crime against a household is counted as having a single 
victim, the affected household. The victimization rate is a 
measure of the occurrence of victimizations among a specified 
population group. For personal crimes, the victimization rate 
is based on the number of victimizations per 1,000 residents 
age 12 or older. For household crimes, the victimization rate 
is the number of incidents per 1,000 households.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older. 
Therefore, the survey excludes violence against children 
under age 12. It includes persons living in group quarters, 
such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group 
dwellings, but excludes persons living in military barracks 
and institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and the homeless.
***********************************************

****************************************
Intimate partner violence accounted 
for 15% of all violent victimizations
****************************************

In 2003–12, intimate partner violence accounted for 14.6% of 
all violent victimizations (table 1). Current or former 
boyfriends or girlfriends (7.8%) committed a greater 
percentage of all violent victimizations than spouses (4.7%) 
and ex-spouses (2.0%). Violence committed by immediate family 
members accounted for 4.3% of all violent victimizations, and 
other relatives accounted for 2.4%. The percentage of total 
violence perpetrated by other relatives (2.4%) was greater 
than the percentage by the victim’s parents (1.2%), children 
(1.5%), or siblings (1.6%). These relationships were similar 
for serious violence and simple assault.

************************************
Domestic violence declined 
from 1994 to 2012
************************************

The rate of domestic violence­ declined 63%, from 13.5 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 1994 to 
5.0 per 1,000 in 2012 (appendix table 3). The overall pattern 
and size of the decline were similar to the decline in the 
overall violent crime rate. Total violence declined 67% from 
a rate of 79.8 per 1,000 to 26.1 per 1,000 (not shown).

From 1994 to 2012, violence committed by intimate partners 
declined at a faster rate than violent crime committed by 
immediate family members and other relatives. Violence 
committed by intimate partners declined 67%, from 9.8 per 
1,000 persons age 12 or older in 1994 to 3.2 per 1,000 in 
2012 (figure 2). Violence committed by immediate family 
members declined 52% during the same period, from 2.7 to 1.3 
per 1,000. Violence committed by other relatives decreased 
49%, from 1.1 to 0.6 per 1,000.

Most of the decline in domestic violence occurred in the 
first half of the period from 1994 to 2002. Rates of violent 
crime committed by intimate partners and other relatives 
continued to decline from 2003 to 2012, while violent crime 
by immediate family members fluctuated between a rate of 0.9 
per 1,000 and 1.3 per 1,000. From 2010 to 2012, violence 
perpetrated by intimate partners and other relatives remained 
relatively stable.

Serious domestic violence (rape, sexual assault, robbery, and 
aggravated assault) declined from 1994 to 2012. Serious 
intimate partner violence declined at a faster rate than 
serious violence committed by immediate family members and 
other relatives. Rates of serious intimate partner violence 
declined by over half, from 3.6 per 1,000 persons age 12 or 
older in 1994 to 1.0 per 1,000 in 2012 (figure 3). During the 
same period, the rate of serious violence by immediate family 
members decreased from 0.7 to 0.3 per 1,000, and serious 
violence by other relatives decreased from 0.4 to 0.2 per 
1,000. Similar to the pattern in overall domestic violence, 
most of the decline in these rates occurred from 1994 to 
2002. Rates of serious intimate partner violence continued to 
decline from 2003 to 2012. During the same time period, 
serious violence by immediate family members fluctuated 
between 0.3 and 0.6 per 1,000, and serious violence 
perpetrated by other relatives varied between 0.1 and 0.5 per 
1,000.

Rates of simple assault by intimate partners, immediate 
family members, and other relatives decreased from 1994 to 
2012. The rate of simple assault by intimate partners 
declined from 6.2 to 2.2 per 1,000 (figure 4). The rate of 
simple assault by immediate family members decreased from 1.9 
to 1.0 per 1,000, while the rate for other relatives declined 
from 0.7 to 0.4 per 1,000. As in overall domestic violence, 
the majority of the decline in these rates occurred from 1994 
to 2002. Simple assaults by intimate partners remained 
relatively stable from 2003 to 2012, fluctuating from 2.1 per 
1,000 to 3.0 per 1,000. Simple assaults perpetrated by 
immediate family members varied from a rate of 0.6 per 1,000 
to 1.0 per 1,000, and the rate for other relatives fluctuated 
from 0.3 per 1,000 to 0.5 per 1,000 during the same time 
period.

****************************************
The rate of intimate partner violence
was greater than the rate of violence 
by immediate family members and 
other relatives
****************************************

The rates of violence committed by acquaintances (8.4 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) and 
strangers (10.2 per 1,000) were greater than the rate of 
domestic violence (5.6 per 1,000) in 2003–12. This was true 
for both serious violence and simple assault. For total 
violent crime and serious violent crime, the rate of violence 
committed by strangers was greater than the rate of violence 
by acquaintances.

In 2003–12, the rate of intimate partner violence (3.9 per 
1,000) was greater than the rate of violence by immediate 
family members (1.1 per 1,000) and other relatives (0.6 per 
1,000) (table 2). The rate of intimate partner violence by 
boyfriends or girlfriends (2.1 per 1,000) was higher than 
violence perpetrated by spouses (1.3 per 1,000) and ex-
spouses (0.5 per 1,000). These patterns were similar for both 
serious violence and simple assault. The rate of violence 
committed by siblings (0.4 per 1,000) was greater than the 
rate by parents (0.3 per 1,000), while the rate of violence 
perpetrated by parents and children were similar.

******************************************
Domestic violence accounted for a greater 
percentage of serious violent crime 
against females than males
******************************************

In 2003–12, a greater percentage of serious violent crime 
against females was committed by someone the victim knew 
(65%) than by a stranger (29%) (table 3). In comparison, 
more serious violent crime against males was committed 
by a stranger (55%) than by someone the victim knew (34%). 
A larger percentage of females (37%) were victims of serious 
domestic violence than males (10%). Both male and female 
victims were more likely to experience violence by an 
intimate partner than a family member or other relative. 
This was also true for simple assault.

****************************************
More domestic violence against victims 
age 18 or older was committed by intimate 
partners than by immediate family 
members and other relatives
****************************************

In 2003–12, a greater percentage of serious violent crime 
against victims ages 12 to 17 was committed by someone the 
victim knew (55%) than by a stranger (37%) (table 4). This 
pattern held for simple assault. For persons ages 18 to 49, 
more than 45% of serious violent victimizations were 
committed by a known offender and more than 43% by a 
stranger. A larger percentage of simple assault against 
persons ages 18 to 49 was committed by a known offender 
(more than 50%) than a stranger (about 40%).

Victims ages 12 to 17 and victims age 50 or older experienced 
more serious violent victimizations and simple assaults 
involving well-known or casual acquaintances than intimate 
partners and family members. For victims ages 12 to 17, the 
percentage of serious violence perpetrated by a family member 
(7%) was slightly greater than serious violence perpetrated 
by an intimate partner (5%). A similar pattern was evident 
for simple assault. Persons age 18 or older experienced more 
serious domestic violence and simple assault perpetrated by 
intimate partners than by immediate family members and other 
relatives.

****************************************
The majority of domestic violence was 
committed against females compared 
to males
****************************************

Among domestic violent victimizations, most were committed 
against females (76%) compared to males (24%), although the 
proportions varied by family relationship (figure 5). The 
majority of intimate partner violence was committed against 
females (82%), compared to males (18%). However, the 
proportion of violence against males and females was more 
evenly distributed for domestic violence perpetrated by 
immediate family members or other relatives. About 60% of 
violence by immediate family members and other relatives was 
committed against females, compared to about 40% of violence 
committed against males.

****************************************
Most domestic violence was committed 
by the victim’s current or former 
boyfriend or girlfriend
****************************************

In 2003–12, most domestic violence against females was 
committed by the victim’s current or former boyfriend or 
girlfriend (39%) or spouse (25%) (figure 6). Similarly, most 
domestic violence against males was committed by the victim’s 
current or former boyfriend or girlfriend (30%). Males 
experienced somewhat similar percentages of domestic violence 
perpetrated by a spouse (13%), sibling (14%), or other 
relative (17%).

****************************************
Simple assault made up the majority 
of domestic violence
****************************************

In 2003–12, the majority of domestic violence was simple 
assault (64%), compared to serious violence (36%) (table 5). 
This pattern held for all victim–offender relationship 
categories. The majority of violence committed by 
acquaintances (73%) and strangers (64%) was also simple 
assault.

Violence committed by intimate partners (36%), immediate 
family members (35%), and other relatives (37%) had similar 
percentages of serious violence. Current spouses (37%) and 
current or former boyfriends or girlfriends (38%) committed a 
higher percentage of serious intimate partner violence than 
former spouses (22%).

****************************************
Intimate partner violence resulted in 
injuries more often than other types 
of domestic violence
****************************************

In 2003–12, about 45% of domestic violence resulted in 
injury. Violence perpetrated by intimate partners (48%) 
resulted in injuries more often than violence perpetrated by 
immediate family (37%) and other relatives (36%) (table 6). 
For all domestic violence categories, the majority of 
physical injuries were bruises or cuts. An estimated 43% of 
intimate partner violence, 32% of violence by immediate 
family members, and 31% of violence by other relatives 
resulted in bruises and cuts. Victims of intimate partner 
violence (11%) were more likely to suffer serious injuries 
(i.e., sexual violence injuries, gunshots, knife wounds, 
internal injuries, unconciousness, and broken bones)  than 
those victimized by immediate family members or other 
relatives (4% each). Comparatively, more than 21% of violence 
committed by acquaintances and strangers involved injuries 
and about 4% involved serious injury. As with domestic 
violence, when injuries were involved in violence committed 
by acquaintances or strangers, the majority of these injuries 
were bruises or cuts.

Of the intimate partner violence victims who were injured, 
34% received some type of medical care, which was slightly 
less than the percentage of victims injured by immediate 
family members (41%) and other relatives (50%). An estimated 
49% of intimate partner violence victims and 54% of victims 
of violence by immediate family members who were injured and 
sought treatment received care in a hospital or medical 
office. Of the victims who were injured by other relatives 
and received care, a greater percentage received care in a 
hospital or medical office (76%) than at the scene, someone’s 
home, or another location (24%).

In comparison, 37% of victims who were injured by 
acquaintances received some type of medical care, with the 
majority receiving that care in a hospital or medical office 
(61%). A greater percentage of victims who were injured by 
strangers received medical treatment, compared to victims of 
intimate partner violence. An estimated 47% of victims who 
were injured by strangers received treatment. Of those who 
received treatment, an estimated 61% received care in a 
hospital or medical office.

****************************************
A similar percentage of violence 
committed by intimate partners and 
immediate family members involved 
weapons (19% each)
****************************************

In 2003–12, most domestic violence did not involve a weapon 
(77%) (table 7). A weapon was involved in a larger percentage 
of violence committed by other relatives (26%) than intimate 
partners (19%) and immediate family members (19%). However, 
there were more intimate partner violence victimizations 
(about 967,700 annually) than victimizations by other 
relatives (158,900 annually). Annually, about 184,800 
intimate partner violent victimizations and about 41,800 
victimizations by other relatives involved a weapon.

When weapons were involved, firearms made up a smaller 
percentage than knives and other weapons of domestic violence 
overall and of intimate partner violence. An equal percentage 
of domestic violence by other relatives involved firearms and 
knives (10% each). Although a lower percentage of intimate 
partner violence (3%) involved a firearm compared to violence 
by other relatives, the average annual number of intimate 
partner violence firearm victimizations was greater due to 
the larger annual average size.

As with domestic violence, most violence committed by 
acquaintances (77%) and strangers (63%) did not involve a 
weapon. When weapons were involved, a larger percentage of 
violence committed by acquaintances involved other weapons 
(7%), compared to firearms (4%) or knives (5%). Strangers 
used firearms in about 10% of violent crimes, which was 
similar to the percentage used by other relatives.

****************************************
About half of all domestic violence 
was reported to police
****************************************

In 2003–12, about 55% of domestic violence was reported to 
police (table 8). A similar percentage of intimate partner 
violence and violence committed by immediate family members 
was reported to police (56% each). An estimated 49% of 
violence by other relatives was reported to police. For each 
category of domestic violence, the percentages reported to 
police were similar for both serious violence and simple 
assault. A smaller percentage of violence committed by 
acquaintances (39%) and strangers (49%) was reported to 
police, compared to intimate partner violence and violence by 
immediate family members.

****************************************
Victims of intimate partner violence 
received more assistance from victim 
service agencies than victims of 
violence by immediate family members 
and other relatives
****************************************

Victim service agencies are publicly or privately funded 
organizations that provide victims with support and services 
to aid their physical and emotional recovery, offer 
protection from future victimizations, guide victims through 
the criminal justice system process, and assist them in 
obtaining restitution. In 2003–12, a greater percentage of 
victims of intimate partner violence (24%) received 
assistance from a victim service agency than victims of 
violence by immediate family members (18%), other relatives 
(9%), acquaintances (9%), or strangers (4%) (table 9). 
Victims of serious intimate partner violence (28%) received 
more assistance than victims of simple assault by an intimate 
partner (22%). Similarly, victims of serious violence 
committed by acquaintances (12%) and strangers (5%) received 
more assistance than victims of simple assault by 
acquaintances (8%) and strangers (4%). However, the 
proportions of assistance received by victims of violence 
committed by immediate family members or other relatives were 
not statistically different for either serious violence or 
simple assault.

****************************************
Most domestic violence occurred 
at or near the victim’s home
****************************************

In 2003–12, 77% of domestic violence occurred at or near the 
victim’s home (table 10). Violence by intimate partners (79%) 
and immediate family members (78%) was more likely to occur 
at or near the victim’s home than violence committed by other 
relatives (66%). An estimated 23% of domestic violence 
occurred in other locations, including a relative’s home, a 
commercial area, or on public transportation.  Unlike 
domestic violence, most violence committed by acquaintances 
(61%) and strangers (75%) occurred in other locations, such 
as commercial places, parking lots or garages, school, or 
open areas.

****************************************
Females had higher rates of domestic 
violence than males
****************************************

In 2003–12, females (6.2 per 1,000) had a higher rate of 
intimate partner violence than males (1.4 per 1,000) (table 
11). The rates of violence committed by immediate family 
members and other relatives were also higher for females than 
for males, although males had higher rates of violence by 
strangers and acquaintances.

As with overall violence, rates of domestic violence were 
highest for persons ages 18 to 24 and lowest for persons age 
65 or older. In 2003–12, persons ages 18 to 24 had the 
highest rates of intimate partner violence (8.7 per 1,000), 
and persons ages 12 to 17 had the highest rates of violence 
by immediate family members (2.6 per 1,000). Persons ages 12 
to 17 (1.2 per 1,000) and 18 to 24 (1.2 per 1,000) had the 
highest rates of violence by other relatives. Persons age 65 
or older had the lowest rates of violence perpetrated by 
intimate partners (0.2 per 1,000), immediate family members 
(0.2 per 1,000), and other relatives (0.1 per 1,000).

These patterns held for violence by strangers and 
acquaintances. Persons ages 12 to 17 had the highest rates of 
violence committed by acquaintances (26.9 per 1,000), and 
persons ages 18 to 24 had the highest rate of stranger 
violence (19.9 per 1,000). Persons age 65 or older had the 
lowest rates of violence perpetrated by acquaintances (1.3 
per 1,000) and strangers (1.6 per 1,000).

In 2003–12, non-Hispanic blacks (4.7 per 1,000) and non-
Hispanic persons of two or more races (16.5 per 1,000) had 
the highest rates of intimate partner violence, compared to 
non-Hispanic whites (3.9 per 1,000), Hispanics (2.8 per 
1,000), and non-Hispanic persons of other races (2.3 per 
1,000). Persons of two or more races had the highest rate of 
violence committed by immediate family members (4.4 per 
1,000). Whites (1.2 per 1,000) experienced more violence 
committed by immediate family members than blacks (0.7 per 
1,000) and Hispanics (0.6 per 1,000). Blacks (1.2 per 1,000) 
experienced more violence perpetrated by other relatives than 
whites (0.6 per 1,000), Hispanics (0.6 per 1,000), and 
persons of other races (0.2 per 1,000). In 2003–12, blacks 
and persons of two or more races had the highest rates of 
violence committed by acquaintances and strangers, compared 
to whites and persons of other races.

The NCVS collects information on a respondent’s marital 
status at the time of the interview, but does not obtain 
marital status at the time of the incident or whether a 
change in marital status occurred after the incident. Rates 
of intimate partner violence were greater for those persons 
who were separated (44.7 per 1,000) or divorced (11.4 per 
1,000), compared to those who were never married (4.4 per 
1,000), married (1.0 per 1,000), or widowed (0.6 per 1,000). 
Persons who were married or widowed had lower rates of 
intimate partner violence than those who were never married. 
Persons who were separated (2.8 per 1,000) also experienced 
more violence committed by immediate family members than 
persons in other marital statuses. Persons who were married 
had lower rates of violence committed by immediate family 
members (0.6 per 1,000) and other relatives (0.4 per 1,000) 
than those who were never married, divorced, or separated. 
Unlike patterns in domestic violence, persons who were never 
married and separated had higher rates of violence 
perpetrated by acquaintances and strangers than persons who 
were married, widowed, or divorced.

****************************************
Violence by immediate family members 
was highest in rural areas
****************************************

In 2003–12, the rate of intimate partner violence against 
urban residents (5.1 per 1,000) was higher than the rate of 
violence against suburban (3.0 per 1,000) and rural (4.3 per 
1,000) residents (table 12). Rural residents had higher rates 
of violence perpetrated by immediate family members (1.6 per 
1,000) than urban (1.2 per 1,000) and suburban (1.0 per 
1,000) residents. Rates of intimate partner violence were 
higher than rates of violence committed by immediate family 
and other relatives for residents in all areas. The rate of 
violence committed by acquaintances was higher for victims 
living in urban (8.8 per 1,000) and rural (9.5 per 1,000) 
areas than in suburban areas (7.8 per 1,000). Urban areas had 
the highest rate of stranger violence (14.2 per 1,000).

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, 
and other theft) both reported and not reported to police. 
In addition to providing annual level and change estimates 
on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source
of information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves 
(e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, 
education level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. The NCVS collects information for each 
victimization incident about the offender (e.g., age, race 
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim–offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and victim 
experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months 
either in person or over the phone for a total of seven 
interviews.

Generally, all first interviews are conducted in person. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in sample for the 
3-year period. The sample includes persons living in group 
quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious 
group dwellings, and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings, such as correctional or 
hospital facilities, and the homeless.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
****************************************

In 2012, 92,390 households and 162,940 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 87% 
for households and 87% for eligible persons. Victimizations 
that occurred outside of the United States were excluded from 
this report. In 2012, less than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States and were 
excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2012 NCVS 
data files, weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Since the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a 
census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to 
inflate sample point estimates to known population totals and 
to compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the 
sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Household weights 
provide an estimate of the U.S. household population 
represented by each household in the sample. After proper 
adjustment, both household and person weights are also 
typically used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (or series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures 
allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these 
similar victimizations as series victimizations and to 
collect detailed information on only the most recent incident 
in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in large increases in the level of violent 
victimization; however, trends in violence are generally 
similar regardless of whether series victimizations are 
included.

In 2012, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. 
Weighting series incidents as the number of incidents up to a 
maximum of 10 incidents produces more reliable estimates of 
crime levels, while the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of 
extreme outliers on the rates. Additional information on the 
series enumeration is detailed in the report Methods for 
Counting High Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the National 
Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012.

Standard error computations
******************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with 
the NCVS, it is important to use caution when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate or when comparing estimates over 
time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses 
and the size of the sample. When the sampling error around an 
estimate is taken into account, the estimates that appear 
different may not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small 
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the 
true value than an estimate with a large standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are 
associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers and percentages in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The Student’s t-statistic was the primary test 
procedure, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

* In 2003–12, according to the NCVS, 21.3% of all violent   
victimization was domestic violence (see table 1). Using the 
GVFs, it was determined that the estimated percentage has a 
standard error of 0.5 (see appendix table 2). A confidence 
interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying the 
standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two- 
tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around 
the 21.3% estimate from 2012 is 21.3 ± (0.5 X 1.96) or (20.3 
to 22.3). In others words, if different samples using the 
same procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 2003–
12, 95% of the time domestic violence would account for 20.3% 
to 22.3% of all violent victimizations.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (Interpret data with caution. Estimate based on 10 or 
fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation is 
greater than 50%).

Domestic violence
******************

The NCVS defines domestic violence as rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, or simple assault committed by 
an offender who is the victim’s current or former spouse, 
boyfriend, girlfriend, parent, child, sibling, or other 
relative. Intimate partner violence is violence committed by 
the victim’s current or former spouse, boyfriend, or 
girlfriend. Because the nature of the victim–offender 
relationship is defined by the victim, the characteristics of 
intimate partner violence as defined in this report may 
differ based on how the respondent perceives their 
relationship with the offender. To some victims, intimate 
relationships with offenders may be primarily restricted to 
current or former boyfriends or girlfriends. Others may 
describe those offenders as friends or acquaintances rather 
than boyfriends or girlfriends. This report examines intimate 
partner violence, violence committed by immediate family 
members (parents, children, or siblings), and violence 
committed by all other relatives.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
********************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they 
are not comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation 
of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the 
Census Bureau found a high degree of confidence that 
estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 are 
consistent with and comparable to estimates for 2005 and 
previous years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, 
NCJ 219413, December 2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 
224390, December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 
227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 
231327, October 2010; Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 
235508, September 2011; Criminal Victimization, 2011, NCJ 
239437, October 2012; and Criminal Victimization, 2012, NCJ 
243389, October 2013 are available on the BJS website. 
Although caution is warranted when comparing data from 2006 
to other years, the combination of 2-year rolling averages 
and 10 years of aggregated data in this report diminishes the 
potential variation between 2006 and later years. In general, 
findings do not change significantly if the year 2006 is 
excluded from the analysis.

*******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office 
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. 
William J. Sabol is acting director. 

This report was written by Jennifer Truman and Rachel 
Morgan. Erika Harrell verified the report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, and 
Barbara Quinn produced the report.

April 2014, NCJ 244697
*******************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

***********************
3/20/2014/JER/9:30am
***********************
