U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4779
---------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

Police Behavior during Traffic and Street Stops, 2011

Lynn Langton, Ph.D., and Matthew Durose, BJS Statisticians

In 2011, over 62.9 million U.S. residents age 16 or older, or 
26% of the population, had one or more contacts with police 
during the prior 12 months (figure 1). For about half (49%) 
of persons experiencing contact with police, the most recent 
contact was involuntary or police-initiated. In 2011, 86% of 
persons involved in traffic stops during their most recent 
contact with police and 66% of persons involved in street 
stops (i.e., stopped in public but not in a moving vehicle) 
believed that the police both behaved properly and treated 
them with respect during the contact. A greater percentage of 
persons involved in street stops (25%) than those pulled over 
in traffic stops (10%) believed the police had not behaved 
properly. Regardless of the reason for the stop, less than 5% 
of persons who believed the police had not behaved properly 
filed a complaint. 

The data in this report were drawn from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) 2011 Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS), a 
supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), 
which collects information from a nationally representative 
sample of persons in U.S. households. The PPCS collects 
information on contact with police during a 12-month period. 
This report examines involuntary contacts with police, 
specifically those that occurred when the person was the 
driver of a motor vehicle (i.e., traffic stops) or when the 
person was stopped by the police while in a public place but 
not in a moving vehicle (i.e., street stops). It describes 
variations in perceptions of police behavior and police 
legitimacy during traffic and street stops. (For more 
information on how perceptions of police behavior and 
legitimacy were measured in this report, see survey questions 
on page 12.) All findings in this report are based on persons 
for whom the most recent contact in 2011 was in a street stop 
or as the driver in a traffic stop. For information on 
voluntary contacts with police, see Requests for Police 
Assistance, 2011, NCJ 242938, BJS website, September 2013.

*****************************************************

************
Highlights
************

* Relatively more black drivers (13%) than white (10%) and 
Hispanic (10%) drivers were pulled over in a traffic stop 
during their most recent contact with police. There were no 
statistical differences in the race or Hispanic origin of 
persons involved in street stops.

* Persons involved in street stops were less likely (71%) 
than drivers in traffic stops (88%) to believe that the 
police behaved properly.

* Of those involved in traffic and street stops, a smaller 
percentage of blacks than whites believed the police behaved 
properly during the stop. 

* Drivers pulled over by an officer of the same race or 
ethnicity were more likely (83%) than drivers pulled over by 
an officer of a different race or ethnicity (74%) to believe 
that the reason for the traffic stop was legitimate.

* White drivers were both ticketed and searched at lower 
rates than black and Hispanic drivers.

* Across race and Hispanic origin, persons who were searched 
during traffic stops were less likely than persons who were 
not searched to believe the police behaved properly during 
the stop. 

* About 1% of drivers pulled over in traffic stops had 
physical force used against them by police. Of these drivers, 
55% believed the police behaved properly during the stop.

* About 6 in 10 persons age 16 or older involved in street 
stops believed they were stopped for a legitimate reason.

* About 19% of persons involved in street stops were searched 
or frisked by police. The majority of persons who were 
searched or frisked did not believe the police had a 
legitimate reason for the search.
*****************************************************

****************************************
About 71% of persons involved in streets 
stops thought the police behaved properly,
compared to 88% of drivers pulled over 
in traffic stops
****************************************

In 2011, less than 1% of the 241.4 million U.S. residents age 
16 or older were involved in a street stop during their most 
recent contact with police (table 1; appendix table 2). A 
greater percentage of males (1%) than females (less than 1%) 
were involved in street stops during 2011. Persons ages 16 to 
24 were more likely than persons age 35 or older to be 
involved in street stops. While no differences were observed 
in the percentage of non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, 
and Hispanic populations age 16 or older involved in a street 
stop, among those who were stopped, a smaller percentage of 
blacks (38%) than Hispanics (63%) or whites (78%) felt the 
police behaved properly during the stop.

Traffic stops were a more common form of police contact than 
street stops in 2011. About 10% of the 212.3 million U.S. 
drivers age 16 or older were stopped while operating a motor 
vehicle during their most recent contact with police. 
***Footnote 1 The driving population includes persons age 16 
or older who reported driving a few or more times during the 
year or who were stopped as the driver in a traffic stop 
during 2011.*** As with street stops, a greater percentage of 
male drivers (12%) than female drivers (8%) were pulled over 
in traffic stops. Across age groups, the highest percentage 
of stopped drivers was among drivers ages 18 to 24 (18%). A 
higher percentage of black drivers (13%) than white (10%) and 
Hispanic (10%) drivers age 16 or older were pulled over in a 
traffic stop during their most recent contact with police.

A higher percentage of drivers in traffic stops (88%) than 
persons involved in street stops (71%) believed the police 
behaved properly during the stop. White drivers pulled over 
by police (89%) were more likely than black drivers (83%) to 
think that the police behaved properly, while no difference 
was observed between the percentages of stopped white drivers 
and Hispanic drivers who thought that the police behaved 
properly. There was also no statistical difference in the 
percentages of black and Hispanic stopped drivers who 
believed the police behaved properly.

***************
Traffic stops
***************

Regardless of the reason for the traffic stop, black (67%) 
and Hispanic (74%) drivers were less likely than white 
drivers (84%) to believe the reason for the stop was 
legitimate 

In 2011, a greater percentage of white drivers (84%) than 
Hispanic (74%) or black drivers (67%) who were stopped by 
police believed they were pulled over for a legitimate reason 
(table 2). Across all races and Hispanic origin, drivers 
stopped for speeding were among the most likely to perceive 
that the reason for the traffic stop was legitimate (90% of 
white, 83% of Hispanic, and 73% of black drivers). In 
general, drivers who were pulled over and not given a reason 
for the traffic stop were the least likely to think the 
traffic stop was legitimate. For example, 51% of white 
drivers who were stopped without the police giving a reason 
believed the stop was legitimate, whereas 84% who were given 
a reason believed that the stop was legitimate.

Among other reasons for traffic stops that were associated 
with comparatively lower perceptions that the stop was 
legitimate, less than 70% of white (69%), black (69%), and 
Hispanic (64%) drivers who were pulled over for a stop light 
or stop sign violation believed the police had a legitimate 
reason for stopping them. Less than 70% of black drivers 
stopped due to a vehicle defect (69%), a seatbelt or cell 
phone violation (64%), or an illegal turn or lane change 
violation (65%) thought the police had a legitimate reason 
for stopping them.

***************************************************
A greater percentage of drivers pulled over by an 
officer of the same race or ethnicity (83%) than 
drivers stopped by an officer of a different race 
or ethnicity (74%) believed the reason for the 
traffic stop was legitimate 
**************************************************

About 83% of drivers pulled over by an officer of the same 
race or Hispanic origin thought the reason for the traffic 
stop was legitimate, compared to 74% of drivers pulled over 
by an officer of a different race or Hispanic origin (table 
3).***Footnote 2 Data on officer race or Hispanic origin are 
based on respondent’s perception..*** However, drivers’ 
perceptions of traffic stop legitimacy varied somewhat by the 
reason for the stop and whether the driver and officer were 
the same race or Hispanic origin. When the reason for the 
stop was speeding, a vehicle defect, a roadside sobriety 
check, or a seatbelt or cell phone violation, drivers pulled 
over by an officer of a different race or ethnicity were less 
likely than drivers pulled over by an officer of the same 
race or ethnicity to perceive the reason for the traffic stop 
to be legitimate. In comparison, a similar percentage of 
drivers stopped for a record check, an illegal turn or lane 
change, or a stop light or stop sign violation perceived the 
stop to be legitimate, regardless of whether the officer was 
the same race or ethnicity as the driver or a different race 
or ethnicity. Whether the driver and officer were intraracial 
(41%) or interracial (42%), the officer’s failure to give a 
reason for the stop resulted in less than half of stopped 
drivers believing the stop was legitimate.

While the majority of drivers pulled over in a traffic stop 
were stopped by white officers, a larger percentage of black 
drivers (14%) than white (4%) or Hispanic (3%) drivers were 
stopped by black officers (table 4). Similarly, a greater 
percentage of Hispanic drivers was stopped by Hispanic 
officers (17%) than were white (3%) or black (6%) drivers.

A similar percentage of white drivers believed the reason for 
the stop was legitimate, regardless of whether they were 
stopped by white, Hispanic, or black officers. While black 
drivers had similar perceptions of police legitimacy when 
pulled over by white (70%) or black (71%) officers, a lower 
percentage of black drivers stopped by Hispanic officers 
perceived the stop to be legitimate (47%). Among Hispanic 
drivers, no differences were observed in perceptions of 
traffic stop legitimacy, regardless of the race or Hispanic 
origin of the officer. 

************************************************
Among drivers who thought the reason for the 
stop was not legitimate, 65% believed the police 
behaved properly, compared to 94% among drivers
who thought the stop was legitimate
*************************************************

When the reason for the traffic stop was not seen as 
legitimate, a smaller percentage of white, black, and 
Hispanic drivers believed the police behaved properly during 
the stop than when the reason for the stop was legitimate. 
Whether the driver and officer were intra- or inter- racial, 
relatively fewer whites, blacks, and Hispanics thought the 
police behaved properly when the reason for the stop was 
perceived to be illegitimate. Regardless of the race or 
Hispanic of the officer, over 90% of white, black, and 
Hispanic drivers who believed the stop was legitimate also 
thought that the police behaved properly. Among white and 
Hispanic drivers who believed the police had no legitimate 
reason for the stop, the percentage who also believed that 
the police behaved properly did not vary, regardless of 
whether the officer was white, black, or Hispanic. Among 
black drivers who believed the officer had no legitimate 
reason for the traffic stop, a higher percentage thought the 
police behaved properly when the officer was black (87%) than 
when the officer was white (58%) or Hispanic (55%).

***********************************************
In 2011, there were small racial differences 
in the percentage of drivers who were ticketed
************************************************

About 5% of the 212.3 million drivers age 16 or older were 
pulled over and ticketed in the most recent contact with 
police (table 5). Another 3% of all drivers were pulled over 
and given a verbal or written warning and 1% were allowed to 
proceed with no enforcement action after being stopped. 

A greater percentage of male drivers (6%) were ticketed than 
female drivers (4%), and a greater percentage of black (7%) 
and Hispanic (6%) drivers were ticketed than white drivers 
(5%). A greater percentage of black drivers (2%) were stopped 
and allowed to proceed with a no enforcement action than 
white (1%) and Hispanic (1%) drivers. A greater percentage of 
drivers ages 18 to 24 (10%) were ticketed than drivers in any 
other age group. 

The majority (93%) of stopped drivers who were issued a 
warning believed that the police behaved properly during the 
stop. Regardless of the demographic characteristics of the 
driver, 87% to 95% of drivers who were issued a warning after 
being stopped believed the police behaved properly. Among 
drivers of all sexes, ages, races and Hispanic origin 
ticketed by police, the percentage who believed the police 
behaved properly ranged from 81% to 90%.

Across most demographic characteristics examined, stopped 
drivers who were allowed to proceed without any enforcement 
action were less likely than drivers who were issued a 
warning to believe the police behaved properly. Since 
previous findings in this report suggest an association 
between perceptions of traffic stop legitimacy and 
perceptions that police behaved properly, this may suggest 
that drivers were less likely to believe the reason for the 
stop was legitimate when no enforcement action occurred as a 
result of the stop.

In 2011, 1% of stopped drivers were arrested during the stop. 
The majority of arrested drivers also received a ticket or a 
warning during the stop. Among stopped drivers who were 
arrested, 76% believed the police behaved properly (not shown 
in table).

*******************************************
Among black and Hispanic stopped drivers, 
a similar percentage of ticketed and not 
ticketed drivers believed the police 
behaved properly during the traffic stop
*******************************************

Among drivers stopped in traffic stops, there was no 
statistical difference in the percentage of white (50%) and 
black (55%) stopped drivers were ticketed in 2011. Hispanic 
stopped drivers (60%) were more likely than white stopped 
drivers to receive a ticket. A greater percentage of white 
drivers were ticketed when stopped by black officers (64%) 
than white officers (49%) (table 6). However, for black and 
Hispanic drivers stopped by police, the percentage issued a 
ticket did not vary by the race or Hispanic origin of the 
officer. These differences and similarities in enforcement 
practices by race or Hispanic origin of the driver and 
officer may be related to the reason for the traffic stop or 
other factors and do not necessarily reflect biased or 
unbiased treatment.

Among white, black, and Hispanic drivers who were stopped and 
ticketed, the percentage who believed the police behaved 
properly did not vary regardless of whether the officer was 
white, black, or Hispanic. Overall, for most racial and 
ethnic groups, the majority of stopped drivers believed the 
police behaved properly whether a ticket was issued or not.

**********************************************
Stopped drivers who were searched were less 
likely than drivers who were not searched to 
believe that the police behaved properly
**********************************************

In 2011, 3% of drivers pulled over by police in a traffic 
stop had their person or vehicle searched (table 7). A 
greater percentage of male drivers (4%) than female drivers 
(2%) were searched during traffic stops. Male drivers 
accounted for 76% of searches conducted among stopped 
drivers. A lower percentage of white drivers stopped by 
police were searched (2%) than black (6%) or Hispanic (7%) 
drivers. A greater percentage of stopped drivers ages 18 to 
34 (5%) than those age 55 or older (1%) was searched during 
traffic stops. 

Across all demographic groups examined, a smaller percentage 
of drivers who had their person or vehicle searched by police 
during a traffic stop than drivers who were not searched 
believed the police behaved properly. Overall, 61% of 
searched drivers believed the police behaved properly, 
compared to 89% of drivers who were stopped but not searched. 
The percentage of searched drivers who believed the police 
behaved properly did not vary by sex, race or Hispanic 
origin, or age.

********************************************
When the police did not ask permission to 
conduct a search, less than half of 
searched drivers thought the officers
behaved properly during the traffic stop
********************************************

Less than half (46%) of drivers believed the police behaved 
properly when a person or vehicle search was conducted 
without the police first asking permission to conduct the 
search or without the police having a perceived legitimate 
reason to conduct the search (table 8). When the police asked 
permission before conducting a search during a traffic stop, 
a greater percentage of drivers believed the police behaved 
properly (72%). Similarly, a greater percentage of drivers 
thought the police behaved properly when they believed the 
police had a legitimate reason for conducting the search 
(86%) than when the reason for the search was not seen as 
legitimate (46%). About 6% of searched drivers reported that 
the police uncovered illegal items during the search (not 
shown in table).

********************************************
More than half of drivers who experienced 
police use of physical force or verbal 
threats thought police behaved properly
********************************************

In 2011, 6% of drivers pulled over in traffic stops 
experienced some type of force used against them, from 
shouting and cursing, to verbal threats of force or other 
action, to physical force, including hitting, handcuffing, 
and pointing a gun (table 9). Of the 1% of stopped drivers 
who experienced physical force during the traffic stop, more 
than half (55%) believed the police behaved properly during 
the contact. A similar percentage of drivers who experienced 
verbal threats of force believed the police behaved properly 
(56%).

Three in 4 (75%) stopped drivers who experienced any type of 
force believed the police actions were unnecessary. About 
two-thirds (65%) of drivers who experienced police use of 
force did not think the force was excessive. Among stopped 
drivers who experienced any type of verbal or physical force, 
83% who believed the force used or threatened against them 
was necessary also thought police behaved properly, compared 
to 38% of those who did not believe the use of force was 
necessary.

*************
Street stops
*************

About 6 in 10 persons involved in 
street stops believed they were 
stopped for a legitimate reason
----------------------------------

In 2011, less than 1% of persons age 16 or older were stopped 
by the police while in a public place (table 10). Among 
persons stopped by the police in a street stop during their 
most recent police contact, at least 41% were stopped because 
the police suspected them of something or they matched the 
description of someone for whom the police were looking. At 
least 16% of persons involved in street stops said the police 
did not provide a reason for the stop or the police were 
seeking information about another person or investigating a 
crime, and at least 7% were stopped because the police were 
providing a service. About 20% of persons involved in street 
stops did not report a reason for the stop.

Overall, 64% of persons involved in street stops believed the 
police stopped them for a legitimate reason. Among persons 
who were stopped because the police suspected them of 
something, 61% thought the reason for the stop was 
legitimate. The percentage of persons who thought the reason 
for the stop was legitimate was higher among those who were 
stopped because the police were providing a service (91%) or 
seeking information or investigating a crime (92%). 
Similarly, compared to those who were stopped because the 
police were investigating a crime (90%) or were providing 
assistance (96%), a lower percentage of persons stopped 
because they were suspected of something believed the police 
behaved properly (68%).

Regardless of the reason for the stop, a slightly higher 
percentage of persons involved in a street stop with an 
officer of the same race or ethnicity believed that the 
police behaved properly (79%) than persons stopped by an 
officer of a different race or ethnicity (62%) (table 11). 
Persons least likely to believe the police behaved properly 
during street stops were those stopped for reasons they did 
not believe were legitimate (38%), persons who were searched 
without a perceived legitimate reason (29%), and persons who 
had force used against them (30%).3

********************************************
Police–Public Contact Survey questions 
pertaining to perceptions of police 
behavior and legitimacy of police actions
*****************************************
Perceptions of police behavior

Q. Looking back in this contact, do you feel the police 
behaved properly?
Perceptions of legitimacy of stop

Q. Would you say that the police officer(s) had a legitimate 
reason for stopping you?
Perceptions of legitimacy of search

Q. Do you think the police officers had a legitimate reason 
to search the vehicle (asked of drivers in traffic stops 
only)?

Q. Do you think that police officers had a legitimate reason 
to search you, frisk you, or pat you down?
Perceptions of police use of force

Q. Did you feel that this/these action(s) [used by police 
against you] was/were necessary?

Q. Did you feel any of the force used or force threatened 
against you was excessive?

*************
Methodology
*************

Data collection
----------------

The Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS) is a supplement to 
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS 
annually collects data on crime reported and not reported to 
the police against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The sample includes 
persons living in group quarters (such as dormitories, 
rooming houses, and religious group dwellings) and excludes 
persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings (such as correctional or hospital facilities) and 
the homeless. (For more information, see the Survey 
Methodology in Criminal Victimization in the United States, 
2008, NCJ 231173, BJS website, May 2011.)

Since 1999, the PPCS has been administered every 3 years at 
the end of the NCVS interview to persons age 16 or older 
within households sampled for the NCVS. Proxy responders and 
those who complete the NCVS interview in a language other 
than English were not eligible to receive the PPCS. 

The U.S. Census Bureau administered the 2011 PPCS 
questionnaire between July 1, 2011, and December 31, 2011, 
and processed the survey data. Respondents were provided a 
list of specific reasons for having contact with police and 
were asked if they had experienced any of those types of 
contacts during the prior 12 months. For example, persons 
interviewed in July 2011 were asked about contacts that 
occurred between August 2010 and July 2011. Persons who said 
they had a contact during 2011 were asked to describe the 
nature of the contact, and those who had more than one 
contact were asked about only their most recent contact 
during the period. To simplify the discussion of the 
findings, this report describes all contacts reported during 
the 12 months prior to the interviews as 2011 contacts.

PPCS nonrespondents consisted of persons whose household did 
not respond to the NCVS (NCVS household nonresponse), persons 
within an interviewed NCVS household who did not respond to 
the NCVS (NCVS person nonresponse), and persons who responded 
to the NCVS but did not complete the PPCS (PPCS person 
nonresponse). The NCVS household response rate was 89% and 
the person response rate was 88%. In 2011, PPCS interviews 
were obtained from 49,246 of the 62,280 individuals age 16 or 
older in the NCVS sample (79%). A total of 13,034 
nonrespondents were excluded from the 2011 PPCS as 
noninterviews or as proxy interviews. Noninterviews (10,907) 
included respondents who were not available for the 
interview, those who refused to participate, and non-English-
speaking respondents. (Unlike the NCVS interviews, PPCS 
interviews were conducted only in English.) The remaining 
2,127 were proxy interviews representing household members 
who were unable to participate for physical, mental, or other 
reasons.

To produce national estimates on police-public contacts, 
sample weights were applied to the survey data so that the 
respondents represented the entire population, including the 
nonrespondents. After adjustment for nonresponse, the sample 
cases in 2011 were weighted to produce a national population 
estimate of 241,404,142 persons age 16 or older.

Despite the nonresponse adjustments, low overall response 
rates and response rates to particular survey items can still 
increase variance in these estimates and produce bias when 
the nonrespondents have characteristics that differ from the 
respondents. The Office of Management and Budget guidelines 
require a nonresponse bias study when the overall response 
rate is below 80%. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and 
the Census Bureau compared the distributions of respondents 
as well as nonrespondents and nonresponse estimates for 
various household and demographic characteristics, and 
examined their impact on the national estimates produced for 
the 2011 PPCS. The study looked at household-level and 
person-level response rates and found some evidence of bias 
in the rates among blacks and persons of Hispanic origin. 
Blacks accounted for 12% of the U.S. population in 2011 but 
about 11% of PPCS respondents after weighting adjustments. 
Hispanics accounted for 14% of the U.S. population but about 
12% of the PPCS respondents after weighting adjustments. 
Because the largest bias in person nonresponse was observed 
in the Hispanic origin characteristics, future iterations of 
the PPCS will address this issue by administering the survey 
in languages other than English and including Hispanic origin 
as a factor in the noninterview adjustment. Item nonresponse 
statistics were also computed for key survey questions from 
the PPCS, and no evidence of bias was found during the 
analysis.

Changes to the 2011 PPCS
-------------------------

Since its inception in 1996, the PPCS has captured 
information about in-person (i.e., face-to-face) contacts 
between police and the public. Telephone contacts were 
previously not included. The survey also excluded face-to-
face interactions in which persons approached an officer or 
an officer initiated contact with them in a social setting or 
because their work brought them into regular contact. In 
March 2010, BJS hosted a series of meetings with subject-
matter experts in the area of policing and police legitimacy 
to initiate discussion and work on substantive changes to the 
PPCS questionnaire. In 2011, based in part on these meetings, 
the PPCS was revised to expand the scope of the survey and to 
better capture contacts with police.

First, to determine if contact occurred and to enhance 
individuals’ recollections about their interactions with 
police over a 12-month period, BJS implemented new screening 
procedures in the 2011 PPCS that describe a broad range of 
situations known to bring people in contact with police. 
Second, the scope of the PPCS was expanded to collect 
information about interactions that people had with the 
police that did not result in a face-to-face contact (e.g., 
reporting a crime to the police by phone or email). 
Additionally, a new set of questions was added to the 
instrument to collect detailed information about requests for 
police assistance (e.g., reporting a crime or noncrime 
emergency) and contacts in which the police stopped someone 
in a public place or on the street but not in a motor vehicle 
(known as street stops).

These revisions, which included adding new questions and 
reordering existing questions, were significant when compared 
to the 2008 version of the questionnaire. To assess the 
impact of the survey redesign on trends in rates and types of 
contact, BJS administered a split-sample design in which a 
subset of the sample was interviewed using the 2008 version 
of the questionnaire, and the remaining sample was 
interviewed using the 2011 version. Based on the evaluation, 
it was determined that a 15/85 split would provide sufficient 
power to measure a 15% change in contact rate. In other 
words, about 85% of the 2011 sample was randomly assigned the 
revised questionnaire and the other 15% received the 
questionnaire designed for the 2008 survey. The Census Bureau 
completed interviews for 41,408 (79%) of the 52,529 residents 
who received the revised questionnaire.

The findings in this report are based on data collected from 
the revised questionnaire. An evaluation of the impact of the 
changes to the 2011 PPCS instrument on trends in contacts 
between the police and the public is underway, and the 
results of that assessment will be made available through the 
BJS website.

Standard error computations
----------------------------- 

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the PPCS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate. Although one estimate may be 
larger than another, estimates based on a sample have some 
degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an estimate 
depends on several factors, including the amount of variation 
in the responses, the size of the sample, and the size of the 
subgroup for which the estimate is computed. When the 
sampling error around the estimates is taken into 
consideration, the estimates that appear different may, in 
fact, not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the PPCS, the Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors 
based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The 
GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each 
point estimate (i.e., numbers or percentages) in the report.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level.
Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

* According to the NCVS, in 2011, an estimated 88.2% of 
drivers stopped by police in traffic stops believed that the 
police behaved properly during the contact (see table 1). 
Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the estimate has a 
standard error of 1.13 (see appendix table 3). A confidence 
interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying the 
standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed 
distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Thus, the confidence interval around the 
estimate is 88.2 ± (1.13 X 1.96) or 86.1 to 90.4. In other 
words, if different samples using the same procedures were 
taken from the U.S. population in 2011, 95% of the time the 
percentage of stopped drivers who believed the police behaved 
properly would be between 86% and 90%.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 10 
or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%).

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not 
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences 
based on the results presented.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

This report was written by Lynn Langton and Matthew Durose. 
Matthew Durose verified the report.

Morgan Young edited the report. Tina Dorsey and Morgan Young 
produced the report.

September 2013, NCJ 242938
******************************************************

***********************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************
9/18/13/JER/11:40am
************************

































































