U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4780
------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

Requests for Police Assistance, 2011

Matthew Durose and Lynn Langton, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians

In 2011, an estimated 31.4 million U.S. residents age 16 or 
older, or 13% of the population, requested assistance from 
the police at least once. About 93% of persons who requested 
police assistance thought the officers acted properly, 86% 
felt the police were helpful, and 85% were satisfied with the 
police response (figure 1). About 93% of persons who 
requested police assistance reported that they were just as 
likely or more likely to contact the police again for a 
similar problem.

The findings in this report are based on the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 2011 Police-Public Contact Survey 
(PPCS), a supplement to the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), which collects information from a nationally 
representative sample of persons in U.S. households. The PPCS 
collects information on contact with police during a 12-month 
period. This report presents the characteristics and 
experiences of persons who contacted law enforcement for 
assistance in 2011, examining perceptions of officer behavior 
and response during these encounters. It details requests for 
police assistance to (1) report a crime, suspicious activity, 
or neighborhood disturbance; (2) report a noncrime emergency; 
and (3) seek help for a nonemergency or other reason.

************************************************

************
Highlights
************

Among persons requesting assistance from the police in 2011:

* An estimated 1 in 8 U.S. residents age 16 or older, or 31.4 
million persons, requested assistance from police at least 
once, most commonly to report a crime, suspicious activity, 
or neighborhood disturbance.  

* The majority of persons who requested police assistance 
felt the officers acted properly (93%) and were helpful 
(86%).

* About 85% of persons who requested police assistance were 
satisfied with the police response. 

* No statistical differences were found between the 
percentage of Hispanics (86%), blacks (85%), and whites (83%) 
who reported a crime or neighborhood disturbance and felt the 
police were helpful.

* Most (93%) persons who requested police assistance felt the 
officers spent an appropriate amount of time with them during 
the contact.

* About 9 in 10 persons who requested police assistance 
reported that they were just as likely or more likely to 
contact the police again for a similar problem.
************************************************

***************************************
An estimated 1 in 8 persons 
requested police assistance in 2011
***************************************

During 2011, an estimated 26% of the 241.4 million U.S. 
residents age 16 or older had one or more contacts with 
police, such as calling to report a crime, being stopped in a 
moving vehicle, or being approached by an officer in a public 
place (table 1). About 13% of the population requested 
assistance from the police at least once in 2011. For 
information on involuntary contacts with police that occurred 
during a traffic or street stop, see Police Behavior during 
Traffic and Street Stops, 2011, NCJ 242937, BJS web, 
September 2013.

The most common reason persons sought assistance from the 
police in 2011 was to report a crime, suspicious activity, or 
neighborhood disturbance (about 19.7 million persons or 8% of 
the population), followed by reporting a noncrime emergency 
(12.6 million or 5%), such as a medical issue or traffic 
accident. About 3.9 million persons, or 2%, sought help from 
the police for other reasons, such as having a problem with 
an animal, returning a lost item, or nonemergency matters 
(e.g., asking for directions.) 

In 2011, a similar percentage of females (13%) and males 
(13%) requested some type of assistance from the police 
(table 2). A greater percentage of non-Hispanic white persons 
(14%) than Hispanic persons (10%) contacted the police for 
assistance. A slightly larger percentage of white persons 
(14%) than black persons (12%) requested police assistance. 
In 2011, persons ages 25 to 44 contacted the police to 
request assistance at higher rates than younger persons (ages 
16 to 24) and older persons (age 65 or older). The rates 
among persons ages 25 to 44 and 45 to 64 were not 
statistically different.
 
A similar percentage of males (8%) and females (9%) contacted 
the police to report a crime or neighborhood disturbance in 
2011. Across all races and Hispanic origin, American Indians 
and Alaska Natives (15%) and persons of two or more races 
(15%) had the highest rates of reporting crime or 
neighborhood disturbances to the police. No statistical 
difference was observed between the percentage of white (9%) 
and black (7%) persons reporting a crime or neighborhood 
disturbance to police in 2011.

***************************************
About 6 in 10 requests for police 
assistance involved face-to-face 
contact with an officer
***************************************

In 2011, persons who requested assistance from law 
enforcement were asked about the methods used to contact the 
police and whether the contact was face-to-face. Persons who 
reported more than one contact with police in 2011 were asked 
to describe the most recent contact. About 24.2 million 
persons reported that their most recent or only contact in 
2011 was to request assistance from the police (table 3). 
About 6 in 10 (62%) persons who requested police assistance 
in 2011 had face-to-face interaction with an officer during 
their most recent contact. Among persons who requested police 
assistance and had face-to-face contact with an officer, 
about 3 in 4 persons (75%) initiated the contact by telephone 
(not in table). The other 25% of contacts were initiated by 
the person approaching the police in public (e.g., the police 
station or on the street), the police coming to the person’s 
house, a third party (e.g., a company or another person 
contacting the police), or another method. 

***************************************
The majority (93%) of persons who 
requested police assistance felt the 
officers acted properly 
***************************************

Persons who requested assistance from the police (either in-
person or not in-person) for any reason were asked if they 
felt police acted properly during the contact, were helpful, 
spent an appropriate amount of time with them, and improved 
the situation. In addition, persons were asked if they were 
satisfied with the police response and if they were likely to 
contact the police again for a similar problem. 

During 2011, the majority of persons who requested assistance 
from the police for any reason felt the responding officers 
acted properly (93%) and were helpful (86%) (table 4). About 
85% of persons who had contact with police to request 
assistance were satisfied with how the police handled the 
situation. The percentage of persons who were satisfied with 
the police response was not statistically different among 
requests for assistance that involved face-to-face contact 
with an officer (85%) and contacts that were not in-person 
(84%) (not in table).
 
While most people who requested police assistance believed 
the officers were helpful, a larger percentage of persons 
reporting noncrime emergencies (93%) than persons reporting 
crimes or neighborhood disturbances (84%) thought the police 
were helpful. Similarly, a larger percentage of persons 
reporting noncrime emergencies (91%) than persons reporting 
crimes or neighborhood disturbances (82%) were satisfied with 
the police response.

Among persons reporting noncrime emergencies, Hispanics (96%) 
and whites (94%) were more likely than blacks (83%) to feel 
the police were helpful. Among persons reporting a crime or 
neighborhood disturbance in 2011, no statistical differences 
were found between the percentage of Hispanics (86%), blacks 
(85%), and whites (83%) who felt the police were helpful. 
 
While the large majority of white, black, and Hispanic 
persons who reported noncrime emergencies to law enforcement 
felt the officers provided a satisfactory response, blacks 
(79%) were less likely than whites (93%) and somewhat less 
likely than Hispanics (91%) to feel satisfied with the 
response. Among persons reporting a crime or neighborhood 
problem, a similar percentage of whites (83%), blacks (80%), 
and Hispanics (79%) were satisfied with the police response.

A similar percentage of males (86%) and females (86%) who 
requested assistance from the police felt the officers were 
helpful (table 5). No statistical differences were observed 
across age groups of persons who believed the police were 
helpful during requests for assistance.

Among persons who requested assistance from the police in 
2011, about 61% felt the police improved the situation, 21% 
felt the police did not improve the situation, and 18% were 
unable to say whether the situation did or did not improve 
(table 6). A larger percentage of persons reporting noncrime 
emergencies (70%) than persons reporting crimes or 
neighborhood disturbances (58%) felt the police improved the 
situation.

***************************************
About 9 in 10 persons who requested 
police assistance felt the police 
spent an appropriate amount of time 
with them during the contact
***************************************

Overall, most (93%) persons who requested police assistance 
in 2011 felt the officers spent an appropriate amount of time 
with them during the contact (table 7). An estimated 2% of 
persons felt the police spent too much time with them, and 6% 
felt the police spent too little time with them. 

Perceptions about whether police spent an appropriate amount 
of time responding to requests for assistance were related to 
views about the behavior and response of police during the 
contact. Among persons who believed the police had not 
behaved properly, about 37% thought the police spent an 
appropriate amount of time with them. In comparison, among 
persons who felt the police acted properly, 97% felt the 
police spent an appropriate amount of time with them. Among 
persons who felt the police did not provide a satisfactory 
response during a request for assistance, about 59% believed 
the officers spent an appropriate amount of time with them, 
compared to about 98% of persons who were satisfied with the 
police response.

********************************************
About 9 in 10 persons who requested police 
assistance in 2011 stated they were just as 
likely or more likely to contact police 
again for a similar problem
***************************************

The large majority of persons who requested police assistance 
to report a crime or neighborhood disturbance (93%) or a 
noncrime emergency (96%) stated they were just as likely or 
more likely to contact the police again for a similiar 
problem (table 8). In addition, the majority of persons 
reported being just as likely or more likely to contact the 
police again for a similar problem, even when the police were 
not helpful (65%), did not behave properly (53%), or did not 
provide a satisfactory response (66%). However, negative 
perceptions of police behavior were related to a lower 
likelihood of persons contacting the police in the future. 
For example, among persons requesting police assistance in 
2011, about 47% of those who believed the police had not 
acted properly reported that they were less likely to contact 
the police again for a similar problem, compared to 4% of 
persons who felt the police behaved properly (table 9). 

*************
Methodology
*************

Data collection
******************

The Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS) is a supplement to 
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS 
annually collects data on crimes reported and not reported to 
the police against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The sample includes 
persons living in group quarters (such as dormitories, 
rooming houses, and religious group dwellings) and excludes 
persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings (such as correctional or hospital facilities) and 
the homeless. (For more information, see the Survey 
Methodology in Criminal Victimization in the United States, 
2008, NCJ 231173, BJS web, May 2011.)

Since 1999, the PPCS has been administered every 3 years at 
the end of the NCVS interview to persons age 16 or older 
within households sampled for the NCVS. Proxy responders and 
those who complete the NCVS interview in a language other 
than English were not eligible to receive the PPCS. 

The U.S. Census Bureau administered the 2011 PPCS 
questionnaire between July 1, 2011, and December 31, 2011, 
and processed the survey data. Respondents were provided a 
list of specific reasons for having contact with police and 
were asked if they had experienced any of those types of 
contacts during the prior 12 months. For example, persons 
interviewed in July 2011 were asked about contacts that 
occurred between August 2010 and July 2011. Persons who said 
they had a contact during 2011 were asked to describe the 
nature of the contact, and those who had more than one 
contact were asked about only their most recent contact 
during the period. To simplify the discussion of the 
findings, this report describes all contacts reported during 
the 12 months prior to the interviews as 2011 contacts. 

PPCS nonrespondents consisted of persons whose household did 
not respond to the NCVS (NCVS household nonresponse), persons 
within an interviewed NCVS household who did not respond to 
the NCVS (NCVS person nonresponse), and persons who responded 
to the NCVS but did not complete the PPCS (PPCS person 
nonresponse). The NCVS household response rate was 89% and 
the person response rate was 88%. In 2011, PPCS interviews 
were obtained from 49,246 of the 62,280 individuals age 16 or 
older in the NCVS sample (79%). A total of 13,034 
nonrespondents were excluded from the 2011 PPCS as 
noninterviews or as proxy interviews. Noninterviews (10,907) 
included respondents who were not available for the 
interview, those who refused to participate, and non-English-
speaking respondents. (Unlike the NCVS interviews, PPCS 
interviews were conducted only in English.) The remaining 
2,127 were proxy interviews representing household members 
who were unable to participate for physical, mental, or other 
reasons.  

To produce national estimates on police-public contacts, 
sample weights were applied to the survey data so that the 
respondents represented the entire population, including the 
nonrespondents. After adjustment for nonresponse, the sample 
cases in 2011 were weighted to produce a national population 
estimate of 241,404,142 persons age 16 or older.

Despite the nonresponse adjustments, low overall response 
rates and response rates to particular survey items can still 
increase variance in these estimates and produce bias when 
the nonrespondents have characteristics that differ from the 
respondents. The Office of Management and Budget guidelines 
require a nonresponse bias study when the overall response 
rate is below 80%. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and 
the Census Bureau compared the distributions of respondents 
as well as nonrespondents and nonresponse estimates for 
various household and demographic characteristics, and 
examined their impact on the national estimates produced for 
the 2011 PPCS. The study looked at household-level and 
person-level response rates and found some evidence of bias 
in the rates among blacks and persons of Hispanic origin. 
Blacks accounted for 12% of the U.S. population in 2011 but 
about 11% of PPCS respondents after weighting adjustments. 
Hispanics accounted for 14% of the U.S. population but about 
12% of the PPCS respondents after weighting adjustments. 
Because the largest bias in person nonresponse was observed 
in the Hispanic origin characteristics, future iterations of 
the PPCS will address this issue by administering the survey 
in languages other than English and including Hispanic origin 
as a factor in the noninterview adjustment. Item nonresponse 
statistics were also computed for key survey questions from 
the PPCS, and no evidence of bias was found during the 
analysis.

Changes to the 2011 PPCS
*************************

Since its inception in 1999, the PPCS has captured 
information about in-person (i.e., face-to-face) contacts 
between police and the public. Telephone contacts were 
previously not included. The survey has also excluded face-
to-face interactions in which persons approached an officer 
or an officer initiated contact with them in a social setting 
or because their work brought them into regular contact. In 
March of 2010, BJS hosted a series of meetings with subject-
matter experts in the area of policing and police legitimacy 
to initiate discussion and work on substantive changes to the 
PPCS questionnaire. In 2011, based in part on these meetings, 
the PPCS was revised to expand the scope of the survey and to 
better capture contacts with police. 

First, to determine if contact occurred and to enhance 
individuals’ recollections about their interactions with 
police over a 12-month period, BJS implemented new screening 
procedures in the 2011 PPCS that describe a broad range of 
situations known to bring people in contact with police. 
Second, the scope of the PPCS was expanded to collect 
information about interactions that people had with the 
police that did not result in a face-to-face contact (e.g., 
reporting a crime to the police by phone or email). 
Additionally, a new set of questions was added to the 
instrument to collect detailed information about requests for 
police assistance (e.g., reporting a crime or noncrime 
emergency) and contacts in which the police stopped someone 
in a public place or on the street but not in a motor vehicle 
(street stops).

The effects of these revisions, which included adding new 
questions and reordering existing questions, were significant 
when compared to the 2008 version of the questionnaire. To 
assess the impact of the survey redesign on trends in rates 
and types of contact, BJS administered a split-sample design 
in which a subset of the sample was interviewed using the 
2008 version of the questionnaire, and the remaining sample 
was interviewed using the 2011 version. Based on the 
evaluation, it was determined that a 15/85 split would 
provide sufficient power to measure a 15% change in contact 
rate. In other words, about 85% of the 2011 sample was 
randomly assigned the revised questionnaire and the other 15% 
received the questionnaire designed for the 2008 survey. The 
Census Bureau completed interviews for 41,408 (79%) of the 
52,529 persons who received the revised questionnaire. 

The findings in this report are based on data collected from 
the revised questionnaire. An evaluation of the impact of the 
changes to the 2011 PPCS instrument on trends in contacts 
between the police and the public is underway, and the 
results of that assessment will be made available through the 
BJS website.

Standard error computations 
****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the PPCS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate. Although one estimate may be 
larger than another, estimates based on a sample have some 
degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an estimate 
depends on several factors, including the amount of variation 
in the responses, the size of the sample, and the size of the 
subgroup for which the estimate is computed. When the 
sampling error around the estimates is taken into 
consideration, the estimates that appear different may, in 
fact, not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the PPCS, the Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors 
based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The 
GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each 
point estimate (i.e., numbers or percentages) in the report.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

* According to the PPCS, an estimated 13% of persons age 16 
or older requested assistance from the police in 2011 (see 
table 1). Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the estimate 
has a standard error of 0.5 (see appendix table 1). A 
confidence interval around the estimate was generated by 
multiplying the standard error by ±1.96 (the t-score of a 
normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either 
end of the distribution). Thus, the confidence interval 
around the estimate is 13% ± (0.5 X 1.96). In other words, if 
different samples using the same procedures were taken from 
the U.S. population in 2011, 95% of the time the percentage 
of persons age 16 or older who requested police assistance 
would be between 12% and 14%. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 10 
or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%).

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not 
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences 
based on the results presented.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

This report was written by Matthew Durose and Lynn Langton. 
Lynn Langton verified the report.

Morgan Young edited the report. Tina Dorsey and Morgan Young 
produced the report.

September 2013, NCJ 242938
******************************************************

***********************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************
9/18/13/JER/10:50am
************************
