U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

Deaths in Custody Reporting Program

Mortality in Local Jails, 2000-2007

July 2010   NCJ 222988
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2197

This report is associated with the Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program. For a list of related publications 
go to 
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=19
-------------------------------------------------------------

Margaret Noonan
BJS Statistician

A total of 8,110 inmate deaths in local jails were reported to
the Deaths in Custody Reporting Program (DCRP) from 2000 to
2007 (table 1). The program received data from at least 99%
of the roughly 3,000 jail jurisdictions each year. Annually,
more than 80% of the nation's jails reported no deaths in
their custody. For the 8-year period between 2000-2007, 42%
of the jails nationwide reported no deaths.

The number of deaths in local jails increased each year, from
905 in 2000 to 1,103 in 2007. During the same period, the
growth in the average daily population of jail inmates (31%)
outpaced the increase in inmate deaths (22%). This resulted
in a decline in the mortality rate of jail inmates from 152
deaths per 100,000 inmates to 141 per 100,000 between 2000
and 2007 (figure 1). (see Methodology for calculation of
mortality rates).

Highlights

*From 2000 through 2007, local jail administrators reported
8,110 inmate deaths in custody. Deaths in jails increased
each year, from 905 in 2000 to 1,103 in 2007.

*The mortality rate per 100,000 local jail inmates declined
from 152 deaths per 100,000 inmates to 141 per 100,000
between 2000 and 2007, while the jail inmate population
increased 31% from 597,226 to 782,592.

*Annually, more than 80% of the nation's jails reported no
deaths in their custody.

*Deaths from any illness, including AIDS, accounted for more
than half (53%) of all deaths in local jails. 

*Heart disease was the leading cause among illness deaths in
local jails (42%).

*Suicide was the single leading cause of unnatural deaths in
local jails, accounting for 29% of all jail deaths between
2000 and 2007, but the suicide rate declined from 49 to 36
deaths per 100,000 inmates.

*Between 2000 and 2007, the suicide rates were higher in
small jails than large jails. In jails holding 50 or fewer
inmates, the suicide rate was 169 per 100,000; in the largest
jails, the suicide rate was 27 per 100,000 inmates.

*After adjusting for differences associated with the age,
sex, race, and Hispanic origin, suicide was the only cause of
death that occurred at a higher rate in local jails than in
the U.S. general population. 

From 2000 to 2007, between 3,072 and 2,924 jail jurisdictions, 
reported data to the DCRP (table 2). In 2000,nearly 9 out of 
10 jails (86%) reported zero deaths. By 2007, 8 out of 10 jails 
(81%) of jails reported zero deaths. For the eight-year period 
between 2000 and 2007, about 8 in 10 jails (83%) reported zero 
deaths. For the same period, about 1 in 10 jails (12%) reported 
a single death, and less than 1 in 10 jails (5%) reported 2 or 
more deaths. During this time,no more than 2% of jails reported 
more than 3 deaths (appendix table 1).

Between 2000 and 2007, suicides were the leading cause of
death, but suicide rates continued to decline

Suicide was the single leading cause of death in local jails
(29%), followed by deaths associated with heart disease
(22%), intoxication (7%), and AIDS-related causes (5%)
(figure 2). No other single known cause of death, including
accidents (3%) and homicides (2%), accounted for at least 5%
of deaths. Collectively, deaths from any illness, such as
heart disease, AIDS, cancer, and liver disease, accounted for
the majority (53%) of jail deaths during 2000 to 2007. (See
Methodology for a discussion on the nature of illness
deaths). 

While suicide has been the leading cause of death in local
jails since the 1980s, it has declined over time. The suicide
rate among jail inmates was 129 per 100,000 inmates in 1983,
but 10 years later the rate had declined by more than half to
54 per 100,000 inmates.***Footnote 1 See Suicide and Homicide
in State Prisons and Local Jails, BJS Web, 21 August 2005.***
From 2000 to 2007, the suicide rate declined by about a
quarter, from 49 to 36 suicide deaths per 100,000 jail
inmates. (table 3). 

Besides suicide, AIDS-related deaths were the only other
leading cause of death that declined among jail inmates. Over
the 8-year period, mortality due to AIDS declined by 50%,
from 10 to 5 deaths per 100,000 inmates. The mortality rates
for deaths from all other leading causes of illness in jails
during this time period showed little variation.
 
Deaths due to accidents (4 per 100,000) and homicides (3 per
100,000) also remained relatively constant throughout 2000 to
2007. By comparison, the mortality rate for intoxication
nearly doubled from 6 per 100,000 inmates in 2000 to 10 per
100,000 in 2007.

Ten types of medical conditions accounted for about 8 in 10
illness deaths in jail

Local jail administrators reported over 50 different medical
conditions that led to an inmate's death between 2000 and
2007. Of these 50 fatal medical conditions, 10 accounted for
77% of all illness-related deaths in local jails (appendix
table 2). Heart disease was the leading cause of
illness-related deaths (42% of illness deaths), and was
reported at least 3 times as frequently as any other death
due to illness (appendix table 4). Besides heart disease and
AIDS, no single medical cause of death accounted for more
than 5% of the illness-related deaths in jails between 2000
and 2007. 

Overall, 93% of deaths reported to DCRP during the 8-year
period indicated that an autopsy was completed. A definitive
cause of death could not be determined for 6% (or 491) of
deaths in local jails, and an autopsy was conducted in the
majority (86%) of these unresolved cases (not shown in a
table). No additional information was provided in about
two-thirds of all undetermined deaths. In the remaining
cases, either the information given was insufficient to
determine the manner of death or the autopsy was
inconclusive. 

Over half of deaths occurred within 1 month of admission

Nearly a quarter (24%) of deaths occurred within 2 days of
admission (not shown in table). Overall, more than a third
(38%) of deaths took place within the first 7 days (table 4).
Over half (56%) of inmate deaths occurred within 30 days of
admission. 

The distribution of inmate deaths occurring in the first
month varied by cause. The majority of suicides (64%),
intoxication (80%) and accidental deaths (62%) occurred in
the first month. Deaths due to other illness-related causes
were more frequently observed among inmates serving longer
sentences. Over a third of cancer deaths (36%) and a fifth of
AIDS-related deaths occurred more than 180 days after
admission.

The pattern of deaths since admission generally corresponds
with the length of stay in jail and whether an inmate has
been detained long enough to be at risk of dying during a
certain time period. The number of deaths occurring within
the first month of admission generally corresponds with the
number of inmates who spend less than one month in jail. The
Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) found local jails admitted an
estimated 13 million inmates during the 12 months ending June
29, 2007, with an estimated 80% (10.4 million) serving their
time within one month. Data from the 2004 Survey of Large
Jails (SLJ), which collected discharge data from the largest
jail jurisdictions (1,000 or more inmates), found that more
than two-thirds (46%) of jail inmates were released within
two days of admission, and a majority (80%) served less than
a month (figure 3). Between 3 and 6% of jail inmates served
past day 31. While the survey was limited to the largest
jails, these facilities held more than half of the U.S. jail
inmate population (52%). These facilities' turnover rates
(54%) were half the turnover rate for the smallest jails
(110%). If the sample included all jails, the inverse
relationship between expected length of stay and facility
size would likely increase the frequency of inmates serving
less than 30 days and reduce the pool of inmates at risk of
dying during lengthier stays.

Suicide rates in the nation's smallest jails were 6 times
higher than in the largest facilities

Suicide rates were higher in smaller facilities than in
larger facilities. According to the 2005 Census of Jails,
large jails holding an average daily population (ADP) of
1,000 or more inmates made up about 6% of all jails, and in
2007 these jails held 52% of the nation's jail population.
About 40% of all jails held fewer than 50 inmates on an
average day, and in 2007 these jails held about 3% of all
jail inmates. The smallest jails had the highest average
annual suicide rate (169 per 100,000 inmates), while the 50
largest jails had the lowest average annual suicide rate (27
per 100,000 inmates) (table 5). 

The lower rate of suicide in large jails may reflect the
capacity of these jails to provide a variety of suicide
prevention measures. According to the most recent data
available in the 1999 Census of Jails, over half (54%) of
jails holding fewer than 50 inmates provided staff training
in suicide prevention, compared to 91% of the largest jails.
Fewer than half (41%) of the smallest jails provided inmate
counseling or psychiatric services, while such services were
provided by over 90% of the largest facilities (table 6).
Overall, the availability of various suicide prevention
measures increased with facility size.

This comparatively high suicide rate may be due in part to
the high turnover rate and the resulting shorter inmate stays
in small facilities. ***Footnote 2 Turnover rate is
calculated by taking the sum of admissions plus releases, and
dividing by the average daily population. For more
information on frequency of turnover, see Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2007, BJS Web, 6 June 2008.***
 
The mortality rate for jails holding more than 50 but fewer
than 500 inmates decreased as facility size increased. The
mortality rate of facilities with an ADP of fewer than 50
inmates (284 per 100,000) was at least 60% higher than that
of any other facility size category. Medium-sized jails,
holding between 100 and 499 inmates, had the lowest overall
mortality rate (113 and 115 per 100,000). Larger jails (those
holding more than 500 inmates) generally had higher mortality
rates from illness deaths, such as AIDS, cancer, and liver
disease.

Small jails, holding fewer than 50 inmates, had an
intoxication mortality rate (31 per 100,000) that was three
times higher than the 50 largest jails (8 per 100,000). Also,
the smallest jails had the highest accident mortality rate
(11 per 100,000), and the highest rate of deaths without a
known cause (13 per 100,000). However, homicide rates were
highest in the 50 largest jails with 6 per 100,000 inmates,
compared to 1 per 100,000 for the smallest jails.

Despite the higher mortality rates experienced by the
nation's smallest jails, these facilities accounted for a
small percentage of all jail deaths (7%) (table 7). Jails
holding at least 1,000 inmates accounted for 4,251 (52%) of
deaths reported over the 8-year period. Between 2000 to 2007,
with the exception of one jail in 2002, no jails holding
fewer than 500 inmates reported more than 3 deaths.

The 50 largest jail jurisdictions accounted for a third of
all jail deaths in the United States

The 50 largest jails accounted for about a third of the jail
population in the United States and 35% of all jail deaths.
These large urban jails accounted for about 60% of the jail
deaths from cancer, AIDS, and homicide. In contrast, 19% of
jail suicides and 23% of jail intoxication deaths occurred in
the 50 largest jurisdictions.

Heart disease was the leading cause of death in the 50
largest jail jurisdictions (41 per 100,000), followed by
suicide (27 per 100,000). For all other jails, suicide was
the leading cause of death, followed by heart disease. The
death rate from AIDS in the 50 largest jails (15 per 100,000)
was 7.5 times higher than the rate in jails holding less than
1,000 inmates (2 per 100,000) (not shown in a table). The
homicide rate in the 50 largest jails was 3 times that of all
other jails. The rate of intoxication deaths was 4 times
higher in the smallest jails (31 per 100,000), compared to
the 50 largest jails (8 per 100,000).

Mortality differs among prison and jail populations

Local jails and state prisons differ in their general
purposes, populations housed, and terms of confinement.
3***Footnote 3 For details on the differences between prison
and jail populations, see page 6 of Prison and Jail Inmates
at Midyear 2000, BJS Web, 25 March 2001.*** Jails are locally
operated facilities that confine persons before or after
adjudication. In addition to convicted inmates, jails also
hold inmates awaiting arraignment, trial, and conviction or
sentencing. The annual volume of admissions into jails is
about 17 times the size of the jail population at midyear.
The mean time served in local jails is about 21 days. 

State prisons typically only house sentenced felons, with
annual admissions that amount to just over half of their
yearend population. In 2006 the mean time served by offenders
released from state prison was 32 months. 

As a result of the differences between jails and state
prisons, the number, rate, and pattern of deaths differed.
Between 2000 and 2007, an average of 3,134 state prisoner
deaths occurred each year, compared to 1,029 jail inmate
deaths each year (table 8).

The overall mortality rate in state prisons (251 per 100,000
prisoners) was 1.7 times higher than that of local jails (143
per 100,000 inmates) for the same period.*** Footnote 4 The
DCRP began collecting death data from state prisons starting
in 2001. Prior to 2001, data was limited to counts of deaths
by manner of death and sex. For more information, See Medical
Causes of Death in State Prisons, 2001-2004, BJS Web, 21
January 2007.*** In both jails (22%) and state prisons (27%),
heart disease accounted for about a quarter of all deaths.
The rate of heart disease deaths in state prisons (69 per
100,000) was twice that reported by local jails (32 per
100,000). 

In state prisons, cancer also accounted for a quarter of all
deaths (23%), while cancer accounted for 3% of jail
fatalities. The cancer mortality rate in state prison (58 per
100,000) was 12 times that observed in jails (5 per 100,000).
The suicide mortality rate in jails (42 per 100,000) was 2.6
times that in state prisons (16 per 100,000).

Mortality rate for males was slightly higher than females

Males were slightly more likely than females to die in local
jails. The mortality rate for males was 146 per 100,000
compared to 136 per 100,000 for female jail inmates (table
9). Males (33 per 100,000) were 1.3 times more likely than
females to die of heart disease (25 per 100,000), while
females were 1.4 times more likely to die from all other
illnesses (table 10) than males. Also, males (44 per 100,000)
were 1.6 times more likely to commit suicide than females (28
per 100,000), and nearly half as likely as females to die
from intoxication (9 and 17 per 100,000, respectively). 

The overall mortality rate increased dramatically with age,
although older inmates accounted for a small proportion of
the total population. Inmates age 55 and older accounted for
2% of jail inmates, but 14% of jail deaths. The mortality
rate of inmates age 55 and older (892 per 100,000) was more
than twice the rate for inmates age 45 to 54 (383 per
100,000), and 10 times higher than the rate for inmates age
25 to 34 (88 per 100,000), which was the largest age group of
inmates.***Footnote 5 See Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002, BJS
Web, 18 July 2004, and Jail Inmates at Midyear 2007, BJS Web,
6 June 2008.*** AIDS and intoxication were the only causes of
death for which inmates age 55 and older did not die at the
highest rate of all age groups.

Inmates age 45 or older died at a rate nearly 5 times higher
than younger inmates

The overall mortality rate of inmates age 45 and older (474
per 100,000) was nearly 5 times that of younger inmates (98
per 100,000). For all age groups under 45 years old, suicide
was the leading cause of death. Older inmates were 9 times
more likely to die due to an illness. Specifically, older
inmates were 11 times more likely to die from heart disease
and 19 times more likely to die of cancer than inmates
younger than 45. Among causes unrelated to illness, older
inmates were between 1.5 times (suicide) and 2.8 times
(accident) more likely to die than younger inmates.

Hispanic inmates were less likely than whites or blacks to
die in jail; blacks were less likely to commit suicide

White inmates, accounting for nearly half of all jail
inmates, died in local jails at a higher rate (172 per
100,000) than black (123 per 100,000) or Hispanic inmates
(111 per 100,000). Whites (68 per 100,000) committed suicide
at 4 times the rate of black inmates (16 per 100,000) and
twice the rate of Hispanic inmates (33 per 100,000). Whites
and blacks died of heart disease at comparable rates (34 and
35 per 100,000, respectively). Each group was nearly twice as
likely as Hispanics (18 per 100,000) to die of heart disease.
 
Heart disease was the leading cause of death for black
inmates (35 per 100,000), and accounted for more than twice
as many deaths as suicide among blacks (16 per 100,000).
Blacks (13 per 100,000) were 4 times as likely to die from
AIDS-related causes as white inmates (3 per 100,000) and
about twice as likely as Hispanic inmates (6 per 100,000).
Suicide was the single leading cause of death among Hispanic
inmates (33 per 100,000). 

Violent offenders had the highest overall mortality, suicide
and homicide rates 

Overall, violent offenders (191 per 100,000) and public order
offenders (185 deaths per 100,000) were more likely to die in
local jails than other offenders (table 11). Violent
offenders (80 per 100,000) and public-order offenders (68 per
100,000) were the most likely to commit suicide.
Specifically, offenders serving time for homicide, rape, and
kidnapping (200, 197, and 195 per 100,000, respectively) had
the highest suicide rates. Violent offenders also had the
highest rates of cancer and homicide mortality. In
particular, offenders serving time for homicide or kidnapping
were the most likely to be killed (13 per 100,000) while in
jail.

Property and drug offenders (106 per 100,000) had the lowest
overall mortality rates. Drug offenders had the lowest
mortality rates from suicide (22 per 100,000) and homicide (1
per 100,000). 

Public-order offenders had the second highest overall
mortality rate (185 per 100,000), but the mortality rate for
most categories of public-order offenders were below the
overall average. The mortality rate for public order
offenders varied from a high of 432 per 100,000 for
probation/parole violators to a low of 61 per 100,000 for
offenders held on weapons charges. The mortality rates for
all other public-order offenders were equal to or less than
145 per 100,000. 

Leading causes of death in the jail population differed from
the U.S. resident population 

Mortality in local jails differed from mortality in the U.S.
resident population in both prevalence and leading causes of
death. In the resident population, heart disease was the
leading cause and suicide was the tenth leading cause of
death between 2000 and 2006 (the most recent year finalized
mortality data were available) (table 12). By comparison,
suicide was the leading cause of jail deaths, followed by
heart disease (table 13). Among both jail inmates and the
U.S. resident population, the rates of heart disease deaths
increased with age. Similar rates of death from heart disease
were observed for persons under 45 years old in both groups. 
Among persons age 45 and older, the heart disease mortality
rate in jails was higher than in the resident population. 

Cancer was the fourth leading cause of death in jails, but
the second leading cause of death in the resident population.
Across all age groups, death rates from cancer in jails were
consistently lower than in the resident population. The
largest difference was observed among persons age 45 to 54.
The U.S. resident population rate of cancer deaths (122 per
100,000 residents) in this age group was 7 times that of jail
inmates (17 per 100,000 inmates).

Jail suicide rates are consistently higher than suicide rates
in the general U.S. population

Suicide rates for all age groups were at least 3 times higher
among local jail inmates than the general population. The
largest differences were seen among persons age 55 and older.
These jail inmates had a rate of suicide (70 per 100,000
inmates) that was 5 times higher than U.S. residents (14 per
100,000 residents). 

For violent deaths, such as suicide, specific data collected
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) allow
for standardized comparisons between jail and U.S. resident
mortality rates (table 14). Standardizing these rates
accounts for variations in the age, race, and sex composition
of the two groups. For example, males make up 88% of jail
inmates, but 49% of the adult resident population. 

The jail population was adjusted through a direct
standardization so that it would reflect the composition of
the general population. For all groups, the adjusted jail
suicide rates remain consistently higher than that of U.S.
residents. The standardized jail suicide rate was 3.6 times
higher than the suicide rate in the general population, and
the standardized jail suicide rate was higher for both males
and females. Males were 2.9 times more likely to commit
suicide in jail, and females were 5.4 times more likely.
White males (106 per 100,000) had the highest standardized
jail suicide rate, which was 4.8 times higher than the
suicide rate of white males in the general population (22 per
100,000). The standardized suicide rate for Hispanic males
was about twice as high as the general population. Black
males in local jails had the lowest standardized suicide
rate, which nearly matched their suicide rate in the general
population (17 and 12 per 100,000 residents).

The suicide rate of females in jail was five times that of
the suicide rate of females in the general population

Females account for 51% of the general population and 12% of
the jail population, so adjusting the jail population to
reflect the general population would deflate the standardized
suicide rate for females. White females had the highest
standardized jail suicide rate at 37 per 100,000 inmates. The
standardized suicide rate for Hispanic females (17 per
100,000) was lower than that of white females (37 per
100,000), but suicide among Hispanic females in jail occurred
8.5 times more than in the general population (2 per 100,000)
post-standardization. Blacks had the lowest standardized
suicide rate among females (6 per 100,000), but it was 3
times higher than the suicide rate of black females (2 per
100,000) in the general population. 

The actual suicide rate in jail varies from the standardized
jail suicide rate based on race and sex

Overall, the actual (observed) suicide rate (42 per 100,000
inmates) in jail is nearly equal to the standardized jail
suicide rate (47 per 100,000 inmates). Female suicide rates
in jails are nearly equal regardless of the standardization,
while the male suicide rate is 1.3 times higher
post-standardization. With the exception of whites, the jail
suicide rates both before and after standardization show
little variation. Among females, the standardized suicide
rate was lower for every race or ethnic group.

Methodology

Deaths in Custody Reporting Program

The local jail portion of the Deaths in Custody Reporting
Program began in 2000 after the passage of the Deaths in
Custody Reporting Act of 2000. The Governments Division of
the U.S. Census Bureau, as an agent for BJS, collected
facility-level information, death counts, and information
surrounding the death from local jails. Data on inmate deaths
were requested at the end of each calendar quarter. At
yearend, jails submitted a reconciled annual count that
summed to the quarterly count. Additionally, jail
administrators submitted data on inmate population and
admission counts, which were the basis for the calculation of
inmate mortality rates. 

Jail respondents were instructed to report the death of any
inmate in their custody, even if the inmate was held for
other jurisdictions. Respondents were also instructed to
include the death of any inmate in transit or sent outside
the jail facility for medical, mental health, or substance
abuse treatment services. Inmates who died while on or
traveling to or from work-release programs were also
included. Deaths of jail inmates who were released on
temporary furloughs or who had escaped the jail facility were
excluded.

Medical cause of death information was collected for illness
deaths, but not for other manners of death. The illness
category is a heterogeneous category for natural causes of
death associated with an underlying illness. Due to the
variation within the illness category, each illness death was
discussed in terms of the known medical cause of death as
determined by the autopsy. For each death marked as
illness/natural cause, respondents were directed to specify a
medical cause of death based on an autopsy review, if
available.

These text entries were later coded by clinical data
specialists according to the World Health Organization's
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10). BJS
analysis of causes of death used categories of disease
published by the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS). For this report, accidents, suicides, and homicides
were discussed in terms of cause of death. While there is a
clear distinction between manner and cause of death from a
medical-legal standpoint, no such distinction was made in
this report. 

More information on state prison death data and the Deaths in
Custody Reporting Program is available on the BJS Website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=243#Metho
dology>. 

Average daily population used in calculating mortality rates
 
Mortality rates were calculated as the number of deaths per
year divided by the annual average daily population (ADP) of
jail inmates and expressed in terms of deaths per 100,000
jail inmates. The measure of ADP was for the 12-month period
ending December 31.
 
The ADP implicitly measures the number of jail inmate days
per year, thereby annualizing the mortality rates. The ADP
reflects the number of admissions and their length of stay
and can be expressed as the product of the number of
admissions times mean length of stay. When mean length of
stay is expressed in years, the ADP is equivalent to the
number of person-years spent by jail inmates during a given
year. This allows for reporting annualized mortality rates
that are comparable in concept to the annual mortality rates
reported by the National Center on Health Statistics. NCHS
calculates (crude) mortality rates as the number of events
for a period (e.g., year) divided by the population estimated
at the midpoint of the period. For general population
mortality statistics the use of the population at the
midpoint of a year is employed as an approximation to the
average population exposed to risk of death during the year.
(See, e.g., Jacob S. Siegal and David Swanson (2004). The
Methods and Materials of Demography, Second Edition, San
Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press, p. 269.) 

Because length of stay in jail is comparatively short (i.e.,
about 21 days) the ADP is preferred over the midyear jail
population count in the estimation of the average population
exposed to risk of dying in jail. The average daily
population is an appropriate measure because it is the
closest measure of the accepted epidemiology model of "person
years," or the number of years the person lives in the
population prior to death (Gaswirth, J.L. (2006) "Case
Comment-Buncher v. Brown County: the need for an appropriate
comparison of suicide rates." Law, Probability and Risk
(2005) 4, 257-263). Unless otherwise specified, the jail
mortality rate was expressed in terms of the number of jail
inmate days throughout the report.

For 2000 and 2001, data on ADP were not collected by the
DCRP. To estimate each jail's ADP for these two years, an
average of the inmate custody population on January 1st of
the reference year and on December 31st of the year was used.
From 2002-forward, the ADP was collected by the DCRP and was
as the estimate of the population at risk of dying in jail.
To estimate the ADP of the characteristics of jail
inmates-such as age, race, and gender-population proportions
from BJS' 2002 Survey of Inmates in Local Jails were
generated and applied to the average of each year's ADP.
These were the most recently available data for selected jail
inmate population characteristics nationwide. Data from BJS'
Annual Survey of Jails indicate that the distribution of
inmate characteristics such as gender and race have changed
slowly over time. See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2008 -
Statistical Tables,BJS web, 31 March 2009 more information. 
Using the 2002 inmate survey data to estimate the distributions 
of inmate characteristics and applying these distributions to 
the average ADP over the period results in a reasonable estimate 
of the ADP of inmate characteristics.

U.S. resident population sources

The NCHS's vital statistics program provided the U.S.
resident population mortality data and rates presented in
this report. See the NCHS website for mortality data for the
U.S. resident population at
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/deaths.htm>. The Center for Disease
Control's (CDC) Web-based Injury Statistics Query and
Reporting System was the source for age-specific suicide data
in the U.S. resident population. See
<http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index.html> for more
information.

Medical cause of death in state prisons

2004 was the last year finalized clinical ICD data was
available for state prisons. ICD distributions from 2001-2004
were applied to prison data reported to the DCRP for
2005-2007. More information on state prison death data and
the Deaths in Custody Reporting Program is available on the
BJS Website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=243#Metho
dology>. 

Discharge data

Inmates are typically discharged from jail through bail,
release by a court order, community supervision, time served
or death. Estimates of time served by inmates discharged from
jail are based on unpublished BJS data. 

Direct standardization of suicide rates in jail and U.S.
resident populations

The method of direct standardization was used to compare
suicide rates in the jail inmate population with suicide
rates in the general population. Because the characteristics
of the jail inmate population differ from the characteristics
of the general population, and as some characteristics are
associated with suicide rates, a direct comparison of the
crude suicide mortality rates between jail inmates and the
general population can be misleading. For example, in jails,
older white males are more likely to commit suicide than
other groups, but older white males comprise a smaller
fraction of the jail population than they comprise of the
general population.

In order to compare the jail and U.S. resident population
suicide rates, the differences in these two populations'
gender, race, and age distributions were taken into account
by method of direct standardization. The jail population was
adjusted to the age distribution of the general population,
creating the standardized population; this was done within
race and gender groups. The age-specific jail suicide rates
were applied to the standardized population to produce an
estimate of the expected number of suicides that would occur
in jail if the age distribution of the jail population were
the same as that of the general population. Again, this was
done within race and gender groups. The expected numbers of
suicides across age groups were summed and the total divided
by the ADP of jail population to produce the standardized
suicide rates that were compared to the general population
rates.
-------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

This Special Report was written by Margaret Noonan. William
Sabol and Spencer Li verified the report.

Doris J. James, Catherine Bird, and Jill Duncan edited the
report, Barbara Quinn and Tina Dorsey produced the report,
and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final printing
under the supervision of Doris J. James.

July 2010, NCJ 222988

------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2197.

------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation -Partnerships- Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

------------------------------------------------------------

7/6/2010/JER/ 9:00 Edits/TD/10:10